The Holy See
POST-SYNODAL
APOSTOLIC EXHORTATION
 RECONCILIATION AND PENANCE
OF JOHN PAUL II
TO THE BISHOPS
CLERGY AND FAITHFUL
ON RECONCILIATION AND PENANCE
IN THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH TODAY
INTRODUCTION
ORIGIN AND MEANING OF THE DOCUMENT
1. To speak of reconciliation and penance is for the men and women of our time an invitation to
rediscover, translated into their own way of speaking, the very words with which our savior and
teacher Jesus Christ began his preaching: "Repent, and believe in the Gospel,"(1) that is to say,
accept the good news of love, of adoption as children of God and hence of brotherhood.
Why does the church put forward once more this subject and this invitation?
The concern to know better and to understand modern man and the contemporary world, to solve
their puzzle and reveal their mystery, to discern the ferments of good and evil within them, has
long caused many people to direct at man and the world a questioning gaze. It is the gaze of the
historian and sociologist, philosopher and theologian, psychologist and humanist, poet and mystic:
Above all, it is the gaze, anxious yet full of hope, of the pastor.
In an exemplary fashion this is shown on every page of the important pastoral constitution of the
Second Vatican Council Gaudium et Spes on the church in the modern world, particularly in its
wide-ranging and penetrating introduction. It is likewise shown in certain documents issued
through the wisdom and charity of my esteemed predecessors, whose admirable pontificates were
marked by the historic and prophetic event of that ecumenical council.
In common with others, the pastor too can discern among the various unfortunate characteristics
of the world and of humanity in our time the existence of many deep and painful divisions.
A Shattered World
2. These divisions are seen in the relationships between individuals and groups, and also at the
level of larger groups: nations against nations and blocs of opposing countries in a headlong quest
for domination. At the root of this alienation it is not hard to discern conflicts which, instead of
being resolved through dialogue, grow more acute in confrontation and opposition.
Careful observers, studying the elements that cause division, discover reasons of the most widely
differing kinds: from the growing disproportion between groups, social classes and-countries, to
ideological rivalries that are far from dead; from the opposition between economic interests to
political polarization; from tribal differences to discrimination for social and religious reasons.
Moreover, certain facts that are obvious to all constitute as it were the pitiful face of the division of
which they are the fruit and demonstrate its seriousness in an inescapably concrete way. Among
the many other painful social phenomena of our times one can noted.
The trampling upon the basic rights of the human person, the first of these being the right to
life and to a worthy quality of life, which is all the more scandalous in that it coexists with a
rhetoric never before known on these same rights.
-
Hidden attacks and pressures against the freedom of individuals and groups, not excluding
the freedom which is most offended against and threatened: the freedom to have, profess and
practice one's own faith.
-
- The various forms of discrimination: racial, cultural, religious, etc.
- Violence and terrorism.
- The use of torture and unjust and unlawful methods of repression.
The stockpiling of conventional or atomic weapons, the arms race with the spending on
military purposes of sums which could be used to alleviate the undeserved misery of peoples
that are socially and economically depressed.
-
An unfair distribution of the world's resources and of the assets of civilization, which reaches
its highest point in a type of social organization whereby the distance between the human
conditions of the rich and the poor becomes ever greater.(2) The overwhelming power of this
division makes the world in which we live a world shattered(3) to its very foundations.
-
Moreover, the church-without identifying herself with the world or being of the world-is in the world
and is engaged in dialogue with the world.(4) It is therefore not surprising if one notices in the
structure of the church herself repercussions and signs of the division affecting human society.
Over and above the divisions between the Christian communions that have afflicted her for
centuries, the church today is experiencing within herself sporadic divisions among her own
members, divisions caused by differing views or options in the doctrinal and pastoral field.(5)
These divisions too can at times seem incurable.
2
However disturbing these divisions may seem at first sight, it is only by a careful examination that
one can detect their root: It is to be found in a wound in man's inmost self. In the light of faith we
call it sin: beginning with original sin, which all of us bear from birth as an inheritance from our first
parents, to the sin which each one of us commits when we abuse our own freedom.
Longing for Reconciliation
3. Nevertheless, that same inquiring gaze, if it is discerning enough, detects in the very midst of
division an unmistakable desire among people of good will and true Christians to mend the
divisions, to heal the wounds and to re-establish at all levels an essential unity. This desire
arouses in many people a real longing for reconciliation even in cases where there is no actual
use of this word.
Some consider reconciliation as an impossible dream which ideally might become the lever for a
true transformation of society. For others it is to be gained by arduous efforts and therefore a goal
to be reached through serious reflection and action. Whatever the case, the longing for sincere
and consistent reconciliation is without a shadow of doubt a fundamental driving force in our
society, reflecting an irrepressible desire for peace. And it is as strongly so as the factors of
division, even though this is a paradox.
But reconciliation cannot be less profound than the division itself. The longing for reconciliation
and reconciliation itself will be complete and effective only tot he extent that they reach-in order to
heal it-that original wound which is the root of all other wounds: namely sin.
The Synod's View
4. Therefore every institution or organization concerned with serving people and saving them in
their fundamental dimensions must closely study reconciliation in order to grasp more fully its
meaning and significance and in order to draw the necessary practical conclusions.
The church of Jesus Christ could not fail to make this study. With the devotion of a mother and the
understanding of a teacher, she earnestly and carefully applies herself to detecting in society not
only the signs of division but also the no less eloquent and significant signs of the quest for
reconciliation. For she knows that she especially has been given the ability and assigned the
mission to make known the true and profoundly religious meaning of reconciliation and its full
scope. She is thereby already helping to clarify the essential terms of the question of unity and
peace.
My predecessors constantly preached reconciliation and invited to reconciliation the whole of
humanity and every section and portion of the human community that they saw wounded and
divided.(6) And I myself, by an interior impulse which-I am certain-was obeying both an inspiration
3
from on high and the appeals of humanity, decided to emphasize the subject of reconciliation and
to do this in two ways, each of them solemn and exacting. In the first place, by convoking the Sixth
General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops; in the second place, by making reconciliation the
center of the jubilee year called to celebrate the 1,950th anniversary of the redemption.(7) Having
to assign a theme to the synod, I found myself fully in accord with the one suggested by many of
my brothers in the episcopate, namely, the fruitful theme of reconciliation in close connection with
the theme of penance.(8)
The term and the very concept of penance are very complex. If we link penance with the metanoia
which the synoptics refer to, it means the inmost change of heart under the influence of the word
of God and in the perspective of the kingdom.(9) But penance also means changing one's life in
harmony with the change of heart, and in this sense doing penance is completed by bringing forth
fruits worthy of penance:(10) It is one's whole existence that becomes penitential, that is to say,
directed toward a continuous striving for what is better. But doing penance is something authentic
and effective only if it is translated into deeds and acts of penance. In this sense penance means,
in the Christian theological and spiritual vocabulary, asceticism, that is to say, the concrete daily
effort of a person, supported by God's lose his or her own life for Christ as the only means of
gaining it;(11) an effort to put off the old man and put on the new;(12) an effort to overcome in
oneself what is of the flesh in order that what is spiritual(13) may prevail; a continual effort to rise
from the things of here below to the things of above, where Christ is.(14) Penance is therefore a
conversion that passes from the heart to deeds and then to the Christian's whole life.
In each of these meanings penance is closely connected with reconciliation, for reconciliation with
God, with oneself and with others implies overcoming that radical break which is sin. And this is
achieved only through the interior transformation or conversion which bears fruit in a person s life
through acts of penance.
The basic document of the synod (also called the lineamenta), which was prepared with the sole
purpose of presenting the theme while stressing certain fundamental aspects of it, enabled the
ecclesial communities throughout the world to reflect for almost two years on these aspects of a
question-that of conversion and reconciliation-which concerns everyone. It also enabled them to
draw from it a fresh impulse for the Christian life And Apostolate, That reflection was further
deepened in the more immediate preparation for the work of the synod, thanks to the
instrumentum laboris which was sent in due course to the bishops and their collaborators. After
that, the synod fathers, assisted by all those called to attend the actual sessions, spent a whole
month assiduously dealing with the theme itself and with the numerous and varied questions
connected with it. There emerged from the discussions, from the common study and from the
diligent and accurate work done, a large and precious treasure which the final propositions sum up
in their essence.
The synod's view does not ignore the acts of reconciliation (some of which pass almost
4
unobserved in their daily ordinariness) which, though in differing degrees, serve to resolve the
many tensions, to overcome the many conflicts and to conquer the divisions both large and small
by restoring unity. But the synod's main concern was to discover in the depth of these scattered
acts the hidden root- reconciliation so to speak at the source," which takes place in people's hearts
and minds.
The church's charism and likewise her unique nature vis-a-vis reconciliation, at whatever level it
needs to be achieved, lie in the fact that she always goes back to that reconciliation at the source.
For by reason of her essential mission, the church feels an obligation to go to the roots of that
original wound of sin in order to bring healing and to re-establish, so to speak, an equally original
reconciliation which will be the effective principle of all true reconciliation. This is the reconciliation
which the church had in mind and which she put forward through the synod.
Sacred Scripture speaks to us of this reconciliation, inviting us to make every effort to attain it.(15)
But Scripture also tells us that it is above all a merciful gift of God to humanity.(16) The history of
salvation-the salvation of the whole of humanity as well as of every human being of whatever
period-is the wonderful history of a reconciliation: the reconciliation whereby God, as Father, in the
blood and the cross of his Son made man, reconciles the world to himself and thus brings into
being a new family of those who have been reconciled.
Reconciliation becomes necessary because there has been the break of sin from which derive all
the other forms of break within man and about him. Reconciliation, therefore, in order to be
complete necessarily requires liberation from sin, which is to be rejected in its deepest roots. Thus
a close internal link unites conversion and reconciliation. It is impossible to split these two realities
or to speak of one and say nothing of the other.
The synod at the same time spoke about the reconciliation of the whole human family and of the
conversion of the heart of every individual, of his or her return to God: It did so because it wished
to recognize and proclaim the fact that there can be no union among people without an internal
change in each individual. Personal conversion is the necessary path to harmony between
individuals.(17) When the church proclaims the good news of reconciliation or proposes achieving
it through the sacraments, she is exercising a truly prophetic role, condemning the evils of man in
their infected source, showing the root of divisions and bringing hope in the possibility of
overcoming tensions and conflict and reaching brotherhood, concord and peace at all levels and in
all sections of human society. She is changing a historical condition of hatred and violence into a
civilization of love. She is offering to everyone the evangelical and sacramental principle of that
reconciliation at the source, from which comes every other gesture or act of reconciliation, also at
the social level.
It is this reconciliation, the result of conversion, which is dealt with in the present apostolic
exhortation. For, as happened at the end of the three previous assemblies of the synod, this time
5
too the fathers who had taken part presented the conclusions of the synod's work to the bishop of
Rome, the universal pastor of the church and the head of the College of Bishops, in his capacity
as president of the synod. I accepted as a serious and welcome duty of my ministry the task of
drawing from the enormous abundance of the synod in order to offer to the people of God, as the
fruit of the same synod, a doctrinal and pastoral message on the subject of penance and
reconciliation. In the first part I shall speak of the church in the carrying out of her mission of
reconciliation, in the work of the conversion of hearts in order to bring about a renewed embrace
between man and God, man and his brother, man and the whole of creation. In the second part
there will be indicated the radical cause of all wounds and divisions between people, and in the
first place between people and God: namely sin. Afterward I shall indicate the means that enable
the church to promote and encourage full reconciliation between people and God and, as a
consequence, of people with one another.
The document which I now entrust to the sons and daughters of the church and also to all those
who, whether they are believers or not, look to the church with interest and sincerity, is meant to
be a fitting response to what the synod asked of me. But it is also-and I wish to say this dearly as a
duty to truth and justice-something produced by the synod itself. For the contents of these pages
come from the synod: from its remote and immediate preparation, from the instrumentum laboris,
from the interventions in the Synod Hall and the circuli minores, and especially from the sixty-three
propositions. Here we have the result of the joint work of the fathers, who included the
representatives of the Eastern churches, whose theological, spiritual and liturgical heritage is so
rich and venerable, also with regard to the subject that concerns us here. Furthermore, it was the
Council of the Synod Secretariat which evaluated, in two important sessions, the results and
orientations of the synod assembly just after it had ended, which highlighted the dynamics of the
already mentioned propositions and which then indicated the lines considered most suitable for
the preparation of the present document. I am grateful to all those who did this work and, in fidelity
to my mission, I wish here to pass on the elements from the doctrinal and pastoral treasure of the
synod which seem to me providential for people's lives at this magnificent yet difficult moment in
history.
It is appropriate-and very significant-to do this while there remains fresh in people's minds the
memory of the Holy Year, which was lived in the spirit of penance, conversion and reconciliation.
May this exhortation, entrusted to my brothers in the episcopate and to their collaborators, the
priests and deacons, to men and women religious, and to all men and women of upright
conscience, be a means of purification, enrichment and deepening in personal faith. May it also be
a leaven capable of encouraging the growth in the midst of the world of peace and brotherhood,
hope and joy-values which spring from the Gospel as it is accepted, meditated upon and lived day
by day after the example of Mary, mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom it pleased God
to reconcile all things to himself.(18)
6
PART ONE
CONVERSION AND RECONCILIATION: THE CHURCH'S TASK AND COMMITMENT
CHAPTER ONE
A PARABLE OF RECONCILIATION
5. At the beginning of this apostolic exhortation there comes into my mind that extraordinary
passage in St. Luke, the deeply religious as well as human substance of which I have already
sought to illustrate in a previous document.(19) I refer to the parable of the prodigal son.(20)
From the Brother Who Was Lost...
"There was a man who had two sons; the younger of them said to his father, 'Father, give me the
share of property that falls to me,' " says Jesus as he begins the dramatic story of that young man:
the adventurous departure from his father's house, the squandering of all his property in a loose
and empty life, the dark days of exile and hunger, but even more of lost dignity, humiliation and
shame and then nostalgia for his own home, the courage to go back, the father's welcome. The
father had certainly not forgotten his son, indeed he had kept unchanged his affection and esteem
for him. So he had always waited for him, and now he embraces him and he gives orders for a
great feast to celebrate the return of him who" was dead, and is alive; he was lost, and is found."
This prodigal son is man every human being: bewitched by the temptation to separate himself
from his Father in order to lead his own independent existence; disappointed by the emptiness of
the mirage which had fascinated him; alone, dishonored, exploited when he tries to build a world
all for himself sorely tried, even in the depths of his own misery, by the desire to return to
communion with his Father. Like the father in the parable, God looks out for the return of his child,
embraces him when he arrives and orders the banquet of the new meeting with which the
reconciliation is celebrated.
The most striking element of the parable is the father's festive and loving welcome of the returning
son: It is a sign of the mercy of God, who is always willing to forgive. Let us say at once:
Reconciliation is principally a gift of the heavenly Father.
... To the Brother Who Stayed at Home
6. But the parable also brings into the picture the elder brother, who refuses to take his place at
the banquet. He rebukes his younger brother for his dissolute wanderings, and he rebukes his
father for the welcome given to the prodigal son while he himself, a temperate and hard-working
person, faithful to father and home, has never been allowed-he says to have a celebration with his
friends. This is a sign that he does not understand the father's goodness. To the extent that this
brother, too sure of himself and his own good qualities, jealous and haughty, full of bitterness and
7
anger, is not converted and is not reconciled with his father and brother, the banquet is not yet
fully the celebration of a reunion and rediscovery.
Man every human being-is also this elder brother. Selfishness makes him jealous, hardens his
heart, blinds him and shuts him off from other people and from God. The loving kindness and
mercy of the father irritate and enrage him; for him the happiness of the brother who has been
found again has a bitter taste.(21) From this point of view he too needs to be converted in order to
be reconciled.
The parable of the prodigal son is above all the story of the inexpressible love of a Father-Godwho offers to his son when he comes back to him the gift of full reconciliation. But when the
parable evokes, in the figure of the elder son, the selfishness which divides the brothers, it also
becomes the story of the human family: It describes our situation and shows the path to be
followed. The prodigal son, in his anxiety for conversion, to return to the arms of his father and to
be forgiven, represents those who are aware of the existence in their inmost hearts of a longing for
reconciliation at all levels and without reserve, and who realize with an inner certainty that this
reconciliation is possible only if it derives from a first and fundamental reconciliation-the one which
brings a person back from distant separation to filial friendship with God, whose infinite mercy is
clearly known. But if the parable is read from the point of view of the other son, it portrays the
situation of the human family, divided by forms of selfishness. It throws light on the difficulty
involved in satisfying the desire and longing for one reconciled and united family. It therefore
reminds us of the need for a profound transformation of hearts through the rediscovery of the
Father's mercy and through victory over misunderstanding and over hostility among brothers and
sisters.
In the light of this inexhaustible parable of the mercy that wipes out sin, the church takes up the
appeal that the parable contains and grasps her mission of working, in imitation of the Lord, for the
conversion of hearts and for the reconciliation of people with God and with one another-these
being two realities that are intimately connected.
CHAPTER TWO
AT THE SOURCES OF RECONCILIATION
In the Light of Christ the Reconciler
7. As we deduce from the parable of the prodigal son, reconciliation is a gift of God, an initiative on
his part. But our faith teaches us that this initiative takes concrete form in the mystery of Christ the
redeemer, the reconciler and the liberator of man from sin in all its forms. St. Paul likewise does
not hesitate to sum up in this task and function the incomparable mission of Jesus of Nazareth, the
word and the Son of God made man.
8
We too can start with this central mystery of the economy of salvation, the key to St. Paul's
Christology. "If while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son," writes
St. Paul, "much more, now that we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. Not only so, but
we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received our
reconciliation."(22) Therefore, since "God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself," Paul feels
inspired to exhort the Christians of Corinth: "Be reconciled to God."(23)
This mission of reconciliation through death on the cross is spoken of in another terminology by
the evangelist John, when he observes that Christ had to die " to gather into one the children of
God who are scattered abroad."(24)
But it is once more St. Paul who enables us to broaden our vision of Christ's work to cosmic
dimensions when he writes that in Christ the Father has reconciled to himself all creatures, those
in heaven and those on earth.(25) It can rightly be said of Christ the redeemer that "in the time of
wrath he was taken in exchange"(26) and that, if he is "our peace,"(27) he is also our
reconciliation.
With every good reason his passion and death, sacramentally renewed in the eucharist, are called
by the liturgy the "sacrifice of reconciliation":(28) reconciliation with God and with the brethren,
since Jesus teaches that fraternal reconciliation must take place before the sacrifice is offered.(29)
Beginning with these and other significant passages in the New Testament, we can therefore
legitimately relate all our reflections on the whole mission of Christ to his mission as the one who
reconciles. Thus there must be proclaimed once more the church's belief in Christ's redeeming
act, in the paschal mystery of his death and resurrection, as the cause of man's reconciliation in its
twofold aspect of liberation from sin and communion of grace with God.
It is precisely before the sad spectacle of the divisions and difficulties in the way of reconciliation
between people that I invite all to look to the mysterium crucis as the loftiest drama in which Christ
perceives and suffers to the greatest possible extent the tragedy of the division of man from God,
so that he cries out in the words of the psalmist: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken
me?"(30) and at the same time accomplishes our reconciliation. With our eyes fixed on the
mystery of Golgotha we should be reminded always of that "vertical" dimension of division and
reconciliation concerning the relationship between man and God, a dimension which in the eyes of
faith always prevails over the "horizontal" dimension, that is to say, over the reality of division
between people and the need for reconciliation between them For we know that reconciliation
between people is and can only be the fruit of the redemptive act of Christ, who died and rose
again to conquer the kingdom of sin, to re- establish the covenant with God and thus break down
the dividing wall which sin had raised up between people.
The Reconciling Church
9
8. But, as Pope St. Leo said, speaking of Christ's passion, "Everything that the Son of God did and
taught for the reconciliation of the world we know not only from the history of his past actions, but
we experience it also in the effectiveness of what he accomplishes in the present."(32) We
experience the reconciliation which he accomplished in his humanity in the efficacy of the sacred
mysteries which are celebrated by his church, for which he gave his life and which he established
as the sign and also the means of salvation.
This is stated by St. Paul when he writes that God has given to Christ's apostles a share in his
work of reconciliation. He says: "God...gave us the ministry of reconciliation...and the message of
reconciliation."(33)
To the hands and lips of the apostles, his messengers, the Father has mercifully entrusted a
ministry of reconciliation, which they carry but in out in a singular way by virtue of the power to act
"in persona Christi. " But the message of reconciliation has also been entrusted to the whole
community of believers, to the whole fabric of the church, that is to say, the task of doing
everything possible to witness to reconciliation and to bring it about in the world.
It can be said that the Second Vatican Council too, in defining the church as a "sacrament-a sign
and instrument, that is, of communion with God and of unity among all people," and in indicating
as the church's function that of obtaining "full unity in Christ" for the "people of the present
day...drawn ever more closely together by social, technical and cultural bonds,"(34) recognized
that the church must strive above all to bring all people to full reconciliation.
In intimate connection with Christ's mission, one can therefore sum up the church's mission, rich
and complex as it is, as being her central task of reconciling people: with God, with themselves,
with neighbor, with the whole of creation; and this in a permanent manner since, as I said on
another occasion, "the church is also by her nature always reconciling."(35)
The church is reconciling inasmuch as she proclaims the message of reconciliation as she has
always done throughout her history, from the apostolic Council of Jerusalem(36) down to the latest
synod and the recent jubilee of the redemption. The originality of this proclamation is in the fact
that for the church reconciliation is closely linked with conversion of heart: This is the necessary
path to understanding among human beings.
The church is also reconciling inasmuch as she shows man the paths and offers the means for
reaching this fourfold reconciliation. The paths are precisely those of conversion of heart and
victory over sin, whether this latter is selfishness or injustice, arrogance or exploitation of others,
attachment to material goods or the unrestrained quest for pleasure. The means are those of
faithful and loving attention to God's word; personal and community prayer; and in particular the
sacraments, true signs and instruments of reconciliation, among which there excels, precisely
under this aspect, the one which we are rightly accustomed to call the sacrament of reconciliation
10
or penance and to which we shall return later on.
The Reconciled Church
9. My venerable predecessor Paul VI commendably highlighted the fact that the church, in order to
evangelize, must begin by showing that she herself has been evangelized, that is to say, that she
is open to the full and complete proclamation of the good news of Jesus Christ in order to listen to
it and put it into practice.(37) I too, by bringing together in one document the reflections of the
fourth general assembly of the synod, have spoken of a church that is catechized to the extent that
she carries out catechesis.(38)
I now do not hesitate to resume the comparison, insofar as it applies to the theme I am dealing
with, in order to assert that the church, if she is to be reconciling, must begin by being a reconciled
church. Beneath this simple and indicative expression lies the conviction that the church, in order
ever more effectively to proclaim and propose reconciliation to the world, must become ever more
genuinely a community of disciples of Christ (even though it were only "the little flock" of the first
days), united in the commitment to be continually converted to the Lord and to live as new people
in the spirit and practice of reconciliation.
To the people of our time, so sensitive to the proof of concrete living witness, the church is called
upon to give an example of reconciliation particularly within herself. And for this purpose we must
all work to bring peace to people's minds, to reduce tensions, to overcome divisions and to heal
wounds that may have been inflicted by brother on brother when the contrast of choices in the field
of what is optional becomes acute; and on the contrary we must try to be united in what is
essential for Christian faith and life, in accordance with the ancient maxim: In what is doubtful,
freedom; in what is necessary, unity; in all things, charity.
It is in accordance with this same criterion that the church must conduct her ecumenical activity.
For in order to be completely reconciled, she knows that she must continue the quest for unity
among those who are proud to call themselves Christians but who are separated from one
another, also as churches or communions, and from the church of Rome. The latter seeks a unity
which, if it is to be the fruit and expression of true reconciliation, is meant to be based neither upon
a disguising of the points that divide nor upon compromises which are as easy as they are
superficial and fragile. Unity must be the result of a true conversion of everyone, the result of
mutual forgiveness, of theological dialogue and fraternal relations, of prayer and of complete
docility to the action of the Holy Spirit, who is also the Spirit of reconciliation.
Finally, in order that the church may say that she is completely reconciled, she feels that it is her
duty to strive ever harder, by promoting the "dialogue of salvation,"(39) to bring the Gospel to
those vast sections of humanity in the modern world that do not share her faith, but even, as a
result of growing secularism, keep their distance from her and oppose her with cold indifference
11
when they do not actually hinder and persecute her. She feels the duty to say once more to
everyone in the words of St. Paul: "Be reconciled to God."(40)
At any rate, the church promotes reconciliation in the truth, knowing well that neither reconciliation
nor unity is possible outside or in opposition to the truth.
CHAPTER THREE
GOD'S INITIATIVE AND THE CHURCH'S MINISTRY
10. The church, as a reconciled and reconciling community, cannot forget that at the source of her
gift and mission of reconciliation is the initiative, full of compassionate love and mercy, of that God
who is love(41) and who out of love created human beings;(42) and he created them so that they
might live in friendship with him and in communion with one another.
Reconciliation Comes from God
God is faithful to his eternal plan even when man, under the impulse of the evil one(43) and
carried away by his own pride, abuses the freedom given to him in order to love and generously
seek what is good, and refuses to obey his Lord and Father. God is faithful even when man,
instead of responding with love to God's love, opposes him and treats him like a rival, deluding
himself and relying on his own power, with the resulting break of relationship with the one who
created him. In spite of this transgression on man's part, God remains faithful in love. It is certainly
true that the story of the Garden of Eden makes us think about the tragic consequences of
rejecting the Father, which becomes evident in man's inner disorder and in the breakdown of
harmony between man and woman, brother and brother.(44) Also significant is the gospel parable
of the two brothers who, in different ways, distance themselves from their father and cause a rift
between them. Refusal of God's fatherly love and of his loving gifts is always at the root of
humanity's divisions.
But we know that God, "rich in mercy,"(45) like the father in the parable, does not close his heart to
any of his children. He waits for them, looks for them, goes to meet them at the place where the
refusal of communion imprisons them in isolation and division. He calls them to gather about his
table in the joy of the feast of forgiveness and reconciliation.
This initiative on God's part is made concrete and manifest in the redemptive act of Christ, which
radiates through the world by means of the ministry of the church.
For, according to our faith, the word of God became flesh and came to dwell in the world; he
entered into the history of the world) summing it up and recapitulating it in himself.(46) He
revealed to us that God is love, and he gave us the new commandment" of love,(47) at the same
12
time communicating to us the certainty that the path of love is open for all people, so that the effort
to establish universal brotherhood is not a vain one.(48) By conquering through his death on the
cross evil and the power of sin, by his loving obedience, he brought salvation to all and became
"reconciliation for all. In him God reconciled man to himself.
The church carries on the proclamation of reconciliation which Christ caused to echo through the
villages of Galilee and all Palestine(49) and does not cease to invite all humanity to be converted
and to believe in the good news. She speaks in the name of Christ, making her own the appeal of
St. Paul which we have already recalled: "We are ambassadors for Christ, God making his appeal
through us. We beseech you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God."(50)
Those who accept this appeal enter into the economy of reconciliation and experience the truth
contained in that other affirmation of St. Paul, that Christ "is our peace, who has made us both
one, and has broken down the dividing wall of hostility..., so making peace" that he "might
reconcile us both to God."(51) This text directly concerns the overcoming of the religious division
between Israel-as the chosen people of the Old Testament-and the other peoples, all called to
form part of the new covenant. Nevertheless it contains the affirmation of the new spiritual
universality desired by God and accomplished by him through the sacrifice of his Son, the word
made man, without limits or exclusions of any sort, for all those who are converted and who
believe in Christ. We are all therefore called to enjoy the fruits of this reconciliation desired by
God: every individual and every people.
The Church, the Great Sacrament of Reconciliation
11. The church has the mission of proclaiming this reconciliation and as it were of being its
sacrament in the world. The church is the sacrament, that is to say, the sign and means of
reconciliation in different ways which differ in value but which all come together to obtain what the
divine initiative of mercy desires to grant to humanity.
She is a sacrament in the first place by her very existence as a reconciled community which
witnesses to and represents in the world the work of Christ.
She is also a sacrament through her service as the custodian and interpreter of sacred Scripture,
which is the good news of reconciliation inasmuch as it tells each succeeding generation about
God's loving plan and shows to each generation the paths to universal reconciliation in Christ.
Finally she is a sacrament by reason of the seven sacraments which, each in its own way, " make
the church. "(52) For since they commemorate and renew Christ's paschal mystery, all the
sacraments are a source of life for the church and in the church's hands they are means of
conversion to God and of reconciliation among people.
13
Other Means of Reconciliation
12 The mission of reconciliation is proper to the whole church, also and especially to that church
which has already been admitted to the full sharing in divine glory with the Virgin Mary, the angels
and the saints, who contemplate and adore the thrice-holy God The church in heaven, the-church
on earth and the church in purgatory are mysteriously united in this cooperation with Christ in
reconciling the world to God.
The first means of this salvific action is that of prayer. It is certain that the Blessed Virgin, mother
of Christ and of the church,(53) and the saints, who have now reached the end of their earthly
journey and possess God's glory, sustain by their intercession their brethren who are on
pilgrimage through the world, in the commitment to conversion, to faith, to getting up again after
every fall, to acting in order to help the growth of communion and peace in the church and in the
world. In the mystery of the communion of saints, universal reconciliation is accomplished in its
most profound form, which is also the most fruitful for the salvation of all.
There is yet another means: that of preaching. The church, since she is the disciple of the one
teacher Jesus Christ, in her own turn as mother and teacher untiringly exhorts people to
reconciliation. And she does not hesitate to condemn the evil of sin, to proclaim the need for
conversion, to invite and ask people to "let themselves be reconciled." In fact, this is her prophetic
mission in today's world, just as it was in the world of yesterday. It is the same mission as that of
her teacher and head, Jesus. Like him, the church will always carry out this mission with
sentiments of merciful love and will bring to all people those words of forgiveness and that
invitation to hope which come from the cross.
There is also the often so difficult and demanding means of pastoral action aimed at bringing back
every individual-whoever and wherever he or she may be-to the path, at times a long one, leading
back to the Father in the communion of all the brethren.
Finally there is the means of witness, which is almost always silent. This is born from a twofold
awareness on the part of the church: that of being in herself "unfailingly holy,"(54) but also the
awareness of the need to go forward and "daily be further purified and renewed, against the day
when Christ will present her to himself in all her glory without spot or wrinkle," for, by reason of her
sins, sometimes "the radiance of the church's face shines less brightly" in the eyes of those who
behold her.(55) This witness cannot fail to assume two fundamental aspects. This first aspect is
that of being the sign of that universal charity which Jesus Christ left as an inheritance to his
followers, as a proof of belonging to his kingdom. The second aspect is translation into ever new
manifestations of conversion and reconciliation both within the church and outside her, by the
overcoming of tensions, by mutual forgiveness, by growth in the spirit of brotherhood and peace
which is to be spread throughout the world. By this means the church will effectively be able to
work for the creation of what my predecessor Paul VI called the "civilization of love."
14
PART TWO
THE LOVE THAT IS GREATER THAN SINThe Tragedy of Man13. In the words of St. John the apostle, "If we say we
have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just and will forgive
our sins."(56) Written at the very dawn of the church, these inspired words introduce better than any other human
expression the theme of sin, which is intimately connected with that of reconciliation. These words present the question
of sin in its human dimension: sin as an integral part of the truth about man. But they immediately relate the human
dimension to its divine dimension, where sin is countered by the truth of divine love, which is just, generous and faithful,
and which reveals itself above all in forgiveness and redemption. Thus St. John also writes a little further on that
"whatever accusations (our conscience) may raise against us, God is greater than our conscience."(57)To acknowledge
one's sin, indeed-penetrating still more deeply into the consideration of one's own personhood-to recognize oneself as
being a sinner, capable of sin and inclined to commit sin, is the essential first step in returning to God. For example, this
is the experience of David, who "having done what is evil in the eyes of the Lord" and having been rebuked by the
prophet Nathan,(58) exclaims: "For I know my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. Against you, you alone,
have I sinned and done what is evil in your sight."(59) Similarly, Jesus himself puts the following significant words on the
lips and in the heart of the prodigal son: "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you."(60)In effect, to become
reconciled with God presupposes and includes detaching oneself consciously and with determination from the sin into
which one has fallen. It presupposes and includes, therefore, doing penance in the fullest sense of the term: repenting,
showing this repentance, adopting a real attitude of repentance- which is the attitude of the person who starts out on the
road of return to the Father. This is a general law and one which each individual must follow in his or her particular
situation. For it is not possible to deal with sin and conversion only in abstract terms.In the concrete circumstances of
sinful humanity, in which there can be no conversion without the acknowledgment of one's own sin, the church's ministry
of reconciliation intervenes in each individual case with a precise penitential purpose. That is, the church's ministry
intervenes in order to bring the person to the "knowledge of self"-in the words of St. Catherine of Siena(61)-to the
rejection of evil, to the re-establishment of friendship with God, to a new interior ordering, to a fresh ecclesial conversion.
Indeed, even beyond the boundaries of the church and the community of believers, the message and ministry of penance
are addressed to all men and women, because all need conversion and reconciliation.(62)In order to carry out this
penitential ministry adequately, we shall have to evaluate the consequences of sin with "eyes enlightened"(63) by faith.
These consequences of sin are the reasons for division and rupture not only within each person, but also within the
various circles of a person's life: in relation to the family, to the professional and social environment, as can often be seen
from experience; it is confirmed by the passage in the Bible about the city of Babel and its tower.(64) Intent on building
what was to be at once a symbol and a source of unity, those people found themselves more scattered than before,
divided in speech, divided among themselves, incapable of consensus and agreement.Why did the ambitious project fail?
Why did "the builders labor in vain?"(65) They failed because they had set up as a sign and guarantee of the unity they
desired a work of their own hands alone and had forgotten the action of the Lord. They had attended only to the
horizontal dimension of work and social life, forgetting the vertical dimension by which they would have been rooted in
God, their creator and Lord, and would have been directed toward him as the ultimate goal of their progress.Now it can
be said that the tragedy of humanity today, as indeed of every period in history, consists precisely in its similarity to the
experience of Babel.
CHAPTER ONE
15
THE MYSTERY OF SIN
14 If we read the passage in the Bible on the city and tower of Babel in the new light offered by the
Gospel and if we compare it with the other passage on the fall of our first parents, we can draw
from it valuable elements for an understanding of the mystery of sin. This expression, which
echoes what St. Paul writes concerning the mystery of evil,(66) helps us to grasp the obscure and
intangible element hidden in sin. Clearly sin is a product of man's freedom. But deep within its
human reality there are factors at work which place it beyond the merely human, in the border
area where man's conscience, will and sensitivity are in contact with the dark forces which,
according to St. Paul, are active in the world almost to the point of ruling it.(67)
Disobedience to God
A first point which helps us to understand sin emerges from the biblical narrative on the building of
the tower of Babel: The people sought to build a city, organize themselves into a society and to be
strong and powerful without God, if not precisely against God.(68) In this sense the story of the
first sin in Eden and the story of Babel, in spite of notable differences in content and form, have
one thing in common: In both there is an exclusion of God through direct opposition to one of his
commandments, through an act of rivalry, through the mistaken pretension of being "like him."(69)
In the story of Babel the exclusion of God is presented not so much under the aspect of opposition
to him as of forgetfulness and indifference toward him, as if God were of no relevance in the
sphere of man's joint projects. But in both cases the relationship to God is severed with violence.
In the case of Eden there appears in all its seriousness and tragic reality that which constitutes the
ultimate essence and darkness of sin: disobedience to God, to His law, to the mural norm that he
has given man, inscribing it in his heart and confirming and perfecting it through revelation.
Exclusion of God, rupture with God, disobedience to God: Throughout the history of mankind this
has been and is, in various forms, sin. It can go as far as a very denial of God and his existence:
This is the phenomenon called atheism.
It is the disobedience of a person who, by a free act, does not acknowledge God's sovereignty
over his or her life, at least at that particular moment in which he or she transgresses God's law.
Division Between Brothers
15. In the biblical narratives mentioned above, man's rupture with God leads tragically to divisions
between brothers.
In the description of the "first sin," the rupture with Yahweh simultaneously breaks the bond of
friendship that had united the human family. Thus the subsequent pages of Genesis show us the
man and the woman as it were pointing an accusing finger at each other.(70) Later we have the
16
brother hating his brother and finally taking his life.(71)
According to the Babel story, the result of sin is the shattering of the human family, already begun
with the first sin and now reaching its most extreme form on the social level.
No one wishing to investigate the mystery of sin can ignore this link between cause and effect. As
a rupture with God, sin is an act of disobedience by a creature who rejects, at least implicitly, the
very one from whom he came and who sustains him in life. It is therefore a suicidal act. Since by
sinning man refuses to submit to God, his internal balance is also destroyed and it is precisely
within himself that contradictions and conflicts arise. Wounded in this way, man almost inevitably
causes damage to the fabric of his relationship with others and with the created world. This is an
objective law and an objective reality, verified in so many ways in the human psyche and in the
spiritual life as well as in society, where it is easy to see the signs and effects of internal disorder.
The mystery of sin is composed of this twofold wound which the sinner opens in himself and in his
relationship with his neighbor. Therefore one can speak of personal and social sin: From one point
of view, every sin is personal; from another point of view, every sin is social insofar as and
because it also has social repercussions.
Personal Sin and Social Sin
16. Sin, in the proper sense, is always a personal act, since it is an act of freedom on the part of
an individual person and not properly of a group or community. This individual may be conditioned,
incited and influenced by numerous and powerful external factors. He may also be subjected to
tendencies, defects and habits linked with his personal condition. In not a few cases such external
and internal factors may attenuate, to a greater or lesser degree, the person's freedom and
therefore his responsibility and guilt. But it is a truth of faith, also confirmed by our experience and
reason, that the human person is free. This truth cannot be disregarded in order to place the
blame for individuals' sins on external factors such as structures, systems or other people. Above
all, this would be to deny the person's dignity and freedom, which are manifested-even though in a
negative and disastrous way-also in this responsibility for sin committed. Hence there is nothing so
personal and untransferable in each individual as merit for virtue or responsibility for sin.
As a personal act, sin has its first and most important consequences in the sinner himself: that is,
in his relationship with God, who is the very foundation of human life; and also in his spirit,
weakening his will and clouding his intellect.
At this point we must ask what was being referred to by those who during the preparation of the
synod and in the course of its actual work frequently spoke of social sin.
The expression and the underlying concept in fact have various meanings.
17
To speak of social sin means in the first place to recognize that, by virtue of human solidarity
which is as mysterious and intangible as it is real and concrete, each individual's sin in some way
affects others. This is the other aspect of that solidarity which on the religious level is developed in
the profound and magnificent mystery of the communion of saints, thanks to which it has been
possible to say that "every soul that rises above itself, raises up the world." To this law of ascent
there unfortunately corresponds the law of descent. Consequently one can speak of a communion
of sin, whereby a soul that lowers itself through sin drags down with itself the church and, in some
way, the whole world. In other words, there is no sin, not even the most intimate and secret one,
the most strictly individual one, that exclusively concerns the person committing it. With greater or
lesser violence, with greater or lesser harm, every sin has repercussions on the entire ecclesial
body and the whole human family. According to this first meaning of the term, every sin can
undoubtedly be considered as social sin.
Some sins, however, by their very matter constitute a direct attack on one's neighbor and more
exactly, in the language of the Gospel, against one's brother or sister. They are an offense against
God because they are offenses against one's neighbor. These sins are usually called social sins,
and this is the second meaning of the term. In this sense social sin is sin against love of neighbor,
and in the law of Christ it is all the more serious in that it involves the Second Commandment,
which is "like unto the first."(72) Likewise, the term social applies to every sin against justice in
interpersonal relationships, committed either by the individual against the community or by the
community against the individual. Also social is every sin against the rights of the human person,
beginning with the right to nd including the life of the unborn or against a person's physical
integrity. Likewise social is every sin against others' freedom, especially against the supreme
freedom to believe in God and adore him; social is every sin against the dignity and honor of one's
neighbor. Also social is every sin against the common good and its exigencies in relation to the
whole broad spectrum of the rights and duties of citizens. The term social can be applied to sins of
commission or omission-on the part of political, economic or trade union leaders, who though in a
position to do so, do not work diligently and wisely for the improvement and transformation of
society according to the requirements and potential of the given historic moment; as also on the
part of workers who through absenteeism or non-cooperation fail to ensure that their industries
can continue to advance the well-being of the workers themselves, of their families and of the
whole of society.
The third meaning of social sin refers to the relationships between the various human
communities. These relationships are not always in accordance with the plan of God, who intends
that there be justice in the world and freedom and peace between individuals, groups and peoples.
Thus the class struggle, whoever the person who leads it or on occasion seeks to give it a
theoretical justification, is a social evil. Likewise obstinate confrontation between blocs of nations,
between one nation and another, between different groups within the same nation all this too is a
social evil. In both cases one may ask whether moral responsibility for these evils, and therefore
sin, can be attributed to any person in particular. Now it has to be admitted that realities and
18
situations such as those described, when they become generalized and reach vast proportions as
social phenomena, almost always become anonymous, just as their causes are complex and not
always identifiable. Hence if one speaks of social sin here, the expression obviously has an
analogical meaning. However, to speak even analogically of social sins must not cause us to
underestimate the responsibility of the individuals involved. It is meant to be an appeal to the
consciences of all, so that each may shoulder his or her responsibility seriously and courageously
in order to change those disastrous conditions and intolerable situations.
Having said this in the clearest and most unequivocal way, one must add at once that there is one
meaning sometimes given to social sin that is not legitimate or acceptable even though it is very
common in certain quarters today.(74) This usage contrasts social sin and personal sin, not
without ambiguity, in a way that leads more or less unconsciously to the watering down and almost
the abolition of personal sin, with the recognition only of social gilt and responsibilities. According
to this usage, which can readily be seen to derive from non-Christian ideologies and systemswhich have possibly been discarded today by the very people who formerly officially upheld thempractically every sin is a social sin, in the sense that blame for it is to be placed not so much on the
moral conscience of an individual, but rather on some vague entity or anonymous collectivity such
as the situation, the system, society, structures or institutions.
Whenever the church speaks of situations of sin or when the condemns as social sins certain
situations or the collective behavior of certain social groups, big or small, or even of whole nations
and blocs of nations, she knows and she proclaims that such cases of social sin are the result of
the accumulation and concentration of many personal sins. It is a case of the very personal sins of
those who cause or support evil or who exploit it; of those who are in a position to avoid, eliminate
or at least limit certain social evils but who fail to do so out of laziness, fear or the conspiracy of
silence, through secret complicity or indifference; of those who take refuge in the supposed
impossibility of changing the world and also of those who sidestep the effort and sacrifice required,
producing specious reasons of higher order. The real responsibility, then, lies with individuals.
A situation-or likewise an institution, a structure, society itself-is not in itself the subject of moral
acts. Hence a situation cannot in itself be good or bad.
At the heart of every situation of sin are always to be found sinful people. So true is this that even
when such a situation can be changed in its structural and institutional aspects by the force of law
or-as unfortunately more often happens by the law of force, the change in fact proves to be
incomplete, of short duration and ultimately vain and ineffective-not to say counterproductive if the
people directly or indirectly responsible for that situation are not converted.
Mortal and Venial
17. But here we come to a further dimension in the mystery of sin, one on which the human mind
19
has never ceased to ponder: the question of its gravity. It is a question which cannot be
overlooked and one which the Christian conscience has never refused to answer. Why and to
what degree is sin a serious matter in the offense it commits against God and in its effects on
man? The church has a teaching on this matter which she reaffirms in its essential elements, while
recognizing that it is not always easy in concrete situations to define clear and exact limits.
Already in the Old Testament, individuals guilty of several kinds of sins - sins committed
deliberately,(75) the various forms of impurity,(76) idolatry,(77) the worship of false gods (78) -
were ordered to be "taken away from the people," which could also mean to be condemned to
death.(79) Contrasted with these were other sins especially sins committed through ignorance,
that were forgiven by means of a sacrificial offering.(80)
In reference also to these texts, the church has for centuries spoken of mortal sin and venial sin.
But it is above all the New Testament that sheds light on this distinction and these terms. Here
there are many passages which enumerate and strongly reprove sins that are particularly
deserving of condemnation.(81) There is also the confirmation of the Decalogue by Jesus
himself.(82) Here I wish to give special attention to two passages that are significant and
impressive.
In a text of his First Letter, St. John speaks of a sin which leads to death (pros thanaton), as
opposed to a sin which does not lead to death (me pros thanaton).(83) Obviously, the concept of
death here is a spiritual death. It is a question of the loss of the true life or "eternal life," which for
John is knowledge of the Father and the Son,(84) and communion and intimacy with them. In that
passage the sin that leads to death seems to be the denial of the Son(85) or the worship of false
gods.(86) At any rate, by this distinction of concepts John seems to wish to emphasize the
incalculable seriousness of what constitutes the very essence of sin, namely the rejection of God.
This is manifested above all in apostasy and idolatry: repudiating faith in revealed truth and
making certain created realities equal to God, raising them to the status of idols or false gods.(87)
But in this passage the apostle's intention is also to underline the certainty that comes to the
Christian from the fact of having been "born of God" through the coming of the Son: The Christian
possesses a power that preserves him from falling into sin; God protects him, and "the evil one
does not touch him." If he should sin through weakness or ignorance, he has confidence in being
forgiven, also because he is supported by the joint prayer of the community.
In another passage of the New Testament, namely in St. Matthew's Gospel,(88)Jesus himself
speaks of a "blasphemy against the Holy Spirit" that " will not be forgiven" by reason of the fact
that in its manifestation, it is an obstinate refusal to be converted to the love of the Father of
mercies.
Here of course it is a question of external radical manifestations: rejection of God, rejection of his
grace and therefore opposition to the very source of salvation(89)-these are manifestations
20
whereby a person seems to exclude himself voluntarily from the path of forgiveness. It is to be
hoped that very few persist to the end in this attitude of rebellion or even defiance of God.
Moreover, God in his merciful love is greater than our hearts, as St. John further teaches us,(90)
and can overcome all our psychological and spiritual resistance. So that, as St. Thomas writes,
"considering the omnipotence and mercy of God, no one should despair of the salvation of anyone
in this life."(91)
But when we ponder the problem of a rebellious will meeting the infinitely just God, we cannot but
experience feelings of salutary "fear and trembling," as St. Paul suggests.(92) Moreover, Jesus'
warning about the sin "that will not be forgiven" confirms the existence of sins which can bring
down on the sinner the punishment of "eternal death."
In the light of these and other passages of sacred Scripture, doctors and theologians, spiritual
teachers and pastors have divided sins into mortal and venial. St. Augustine, among others,
speaks of letalia or mortifera crimina, contrasting them with venialia, levia or quotidiana.(93) The
meaning which he gives to these adjectives was to influence the successive magisterium of the
church. After him, it was St. Thomas who was to formulate in the clearest possible terms the
doctrine which became a constant in the church.
In defining and distinguishing between mortal and venial sins, St. Thomas and the theology of sin
that has its source in him could not be unaware of the biblical reference and therefore of the
concept of spiritual death. According to St. Thomas, in order to live spiritually man must remain in
communion with the supreme principle of life, which is God, since God is the ultimate end of man'
s being and acting. Now sin is a disorder perpetrated by the human being against this life-principle. And when through
sin, the soul commits a disorder that reaches the point of turning away form its ultimate end God to which it is bound by
charity, then the sin is mortal; on the other hand, whenever the disorder does not reach the point of a turning away from
God, the sin is venial."(94) For this reason venial sin does not deprive the sinner of sanctifying grace, friendship with
God, charity and therefore eternal happiness, whereas just such a deprivation is precisely the consequence of mortal sin.
Furthermore, when sin is considered from the point of view of the punishment it merits, for St.
Thomas and other doctors mortal sin is the sin which, if unforgiven, leads to eternal punishment;
whereas venial sin is the sin that merits merely temporal punishment (that is, a partial punishment
which can be expiated on earth or in purgatory).
Considering sin from the point of view of its matter, the ideas of death, of radical rupture with God,
the supreme good, of deviation from the path that leads to God or interruption of the journey
toward him (which are all ways of defining mortal sin) are linked with the idea of the gravity of sin's
objective content. Hence, in the church's doctrine and pastoral action, grave sin is in practice
identified with mortal sin.
Here we have the core of the church's traditional teaching, which was reiterated frequently and
21
vigorously during the recent synod. The synod in fact not only reaffirmed the teaching of the
Council of Trent concerning the existence and nature of mortal and venial sins,(95) but it also
recalled that mortal sin is sin whose object is grave matter and which is also committed with full
knowledge and deliberate consent. It must be added-as was likewise done at the synod-that some
sins are intrinsically grave and mortal by reason of their matter. That is, there exist acts which, per
se and in themselves, independently of circumstances, are always seriously wrong by reason of
their object. These acts, if carried out with sufficient awareness and freedom, are always gravely
sinful.(96)
This doctrine, based on the Dccalogue and on the preaching of the Old Testament, and
assimilated into the kerygma of the apostles and belonging to the earliest teaching of the church,
and constantly reaffirmed by her to this day, is exactly verified in the experience of the men and
women of all times. Man knows well by experience that along the road of faith and justice which
leads to the knowledge and love of God in this life and toward perfect union with him in eternity, he
can cease to go forward or can go astray without abandoning the way of God; and in this case
there occurs venial sin. This however must never be underestimated, as though it were
automatically something that can be ignored or regarded as "a sin of little importance."
For man also knows, through painful experience, that by a conscious and free act of his will he can
change course and go in a direction opposed to God's will, separating himself from God (aversio a
Deo), rejecting loving communion with him, detaching himself from the life principle which God is
and consequently choosing death.
With the whole tradition of the church, we call mortal sin the act by which man freely and
consciously rejects God, his law, the covenant of love that God offers, preferring to turn in on
himself or to some created and finite reality, something contrary to the divine will (conversio ad
creaturam). This can occur in a direct and formal way in the sins of idolatry, apostasy and atheism;
or in an equivalent way as in every act of disobedience to God's commandments in a grave
matter. Man perceives that this disobedience to God destroys the bond that unites him with his life
principle: It is a mortal sin, that is, an act which gravely offends God and ends in turning against
man himself with a dark and powerful force of destruction.
During the synod assembly some fathers proposed a threefold distinction of sins, classifying them
as venial, grave and mortal. This threefold distinction might illustrate the fact that there is a scale
of seriousness among grave sins. But it still remains true that the essential and decisive distinction
is between sin which destroys charity and sin which does not kill the supernatural life: There is no
middle way between life and death.
Likewise, care will have to be taken not to reduce mortal sin to an act of " fundamental option"-as
is commonly said today-against God, intending thereby an explicit and formal contempt for God or
neighbor. For mortal sin exists also when a person knowingly and willingly, for whatever reason,
22
chooses something gravely disordered. In fact, such a choice already includes contempt for the
divine law, a rejection of God's love for humanity and the whole of creation; the person turns away
from God and loses charity. Thus the fundamental orientation can be radically changed by
individual acts. Clearly there can occur situations which are very complex and obscure from a
psychological viewpoint and which have an influence on the sinner's subjective culpability. But
from a consideration of the psychological sphere one cannot proceed to the construction of a
theological category, which is what the "fundamental option" precisely is, understanding it in such
a way that it objectively changes or casts doubt upon the traditional concept of mortal sin.
While every sincere and prudent attempt to clarify the psychological and theological mystery of sin
is to be valued, the church nevertheless has a duty to remind all scholars in this field of the need
to be faithful to the word of God that teaches us also about sin. She likewise has to remind them of
the risk of contributing to a further weakening of the sense of sin in the modern world.
The Loss of the Sense of Sin
18. Over the course of generations, the Christian mind has gained from the Gospel as it is read in
the ecclesial community a fine sensitivity and an acute perception of the seeds of death contained
in sin, as well as a sensitivity and an acuteness of perception for identifying them in the thousand
guises under which sin shows itself. This is what is commonly called the sense of sin.
This sense is rooted in man's moral conscience and is as it were its thermometer. It is linked to the
sense of God, since it derives from man's conscious relationship with God as his Creator, Lord
and Father. Hence, just as it is impossible to eradicate completely the sense of God or to silence
the conscience completely, so the sense of sin is never completely eliminated.
Nevertheless, it happens not infrequently in history, for more or less lengthy periods and under the
influence of many different factors, that the moral conscience of many people becomes seriously
clouded. "Have we the right idea of conscience?"-I asked two years ago in an address to the
faithful" Is it not true that modern man is threatened by an eclipse of conscience? By a deformation
of conscience? By a numbness or 'deadening' of conscience,"(97) Too many signs indicate that
such an eclipse exists in our time. This is all the more disturbing in that conscience, defined by the
council as "the most secret core and sanctuary of a man,"(98) is "strictly related to human
freedom.... For this reason conscience, to a great extent, constitutes the basis of man's interior
dignity and, at the same time, of his relationship to God."(99) It is inevitable therefore that in this
situation there is an obscuring also of the sense of sin, which is closely connected with the moral
conscience, the search for truth and the desire to make a responsible use of freedom. When the
conscience is weakened the sense of God is also obscured, and as a result, with the loss of this
decisive inner point of reference, the sense of sin is lost. This explains why my predecessor Pius
XI, one day declared, in words that have almost become proverbial, that "the sin of the century is
the loss of the sense of sin."(100)
23
Why has this happened in our time. A glance at certain aspects of contemporary culture can help
us to understand the progressive weakening of the sense of sin, precisely because of the crisis of
conscience and crisis of the sense of God already mentioned.
"Secularism" is by nature and definition a movement of ideas and behavior which advocates a
humanism totally without God, completely centered upon the cult of action and production and
caught up in the heady enthusiasm of consumerism and pleasure seeking, unconcerned with the
danger of "losing one's soul." This secularism cannot but undermine the sense of sin. At the very
most, sin will be reduced to what offends man. But it is precisely here that we are faced with the
bitter experience which I already alluded to in my first encyclical namely, that man can build a
world without God, but this world will end by turning against him."(101) In fact, God is the origin
and the supreme end of man, and man carries in himself a divine seed.(102) Hence it is the reality
of God that reveals and illustrates the mystery of man. It is therefore vain to hope that there will
take root a sense of sin against man and against human values, if there is no sense of offense
against God, namely the true sense of sin.
Another reason for the disappearance of the sense of sin in contemporary society is to be found in
the errors made in evaluating certain findings of the human sciences. Thus on the basis of certain
affirmations of psychology, concern to avoid creating feelings of guilt or to place limits on freedom
leads to a refusal ever to admit any shortcoming. Through an undue extrapolation of the criteria of
the science of sociology, it finally happens-as I have already said-that all failings are blamed upon
society, and the individual is declared innocent of them. Again, a certain cultural anthropology so
emphasizes the undeniable environmental and historical conditioning and influences which act
upon man, that it reduces his responsibility to the point of not acknowledging his ability to perform
truly human acts and therefore his ability to sin.
The sense of sin also easily declines as a result of a system of ethics deriving from a certain
historical relativism. This may take the form of an ethical system which relativizes the moral norm,
denying its absolute and unconditional value, and as a consequence denying that there can be
intrinsically illicit acts independent of the circumstances in which they are performed by the
subject. Herein lies a real "overthrowing and downfall of moral values," and "the problem is not so
much one of ignorance of Christian ethics," but ignorance "rather of the meaning, foundations and
criteria of the moral attitude."(103) Another effect of this ethical turning upside down is always
such an attenuation of the notion of sin as almost to reach the point of saying that sin does exist,
but no one knows who commits it.
Finally the sense of sin disappears when-as can happen in the education of youth, in the mass
media and even in education within the family-it is wrongly identified with a morbid feeling of guilt
or with the mere transgression of legal norms and precepts.
The loss of the sense of sin is thus a form or consequence of the denial of God: not only in the
24
form of atheism but also in the form of secularism. If sin is the breaking, off of one's filial
relationship to God in order to situate one's life outside of obedience to him, then to sin is not
merely to deny God. To sin is also to live as if he did not exist, to eliminate him from one's daily
life. A model of society which is mutilated or distorted in one sense or another, as is often
encouraged by the mass media, greatly favors the gradual loss of the sense of sin. In such a
situation the obscuring or weakening of the sense of sin comes from several sources: from a
rejection of any reference to the transcendent in the name of the individual's aspiration to personal
independence; from acceptance of ethical models imposed by general consensus and behavior,
even when condemned by the individual conscience; from the tragic social and economic
conditions that oppress a great part of humanity, causing a tendency to see errors and faults only
in the context of society; finally and especially, from the obscuring of the notion of God's
fatherhood and dominion over man's life.
Even in the field of the thought and life of the church certain trends inevitably favor the decline of
the sense of sin. For example, some are inclined to replace exaggerated attitudes of the past with
other exaggerations: From seeing sin everywhere they pass to not recognizing it anywhere; from
too much emphasis on the fear of eternal punishment they pass to preaching a love of God that
excludes any punishment deserved by sin; from severity in trying to correct erroneous
consciences they pass to a kind of respect for conscience which excludes the duty of telling the
truth. And should it not be added that the confusion caused in the consciences of many of the
faithful by differences of opinions and teachings in theology, preaching, catechesis and spiritual
direction on serious and delicate questions of Christian morals ends by diminishing the true sense
of sin almost to the point of eliminating it altogether? Nor can certain deficiencies in the practice of
sacramental penance be overlooked. These include the tendency to obscure the ecclesial
significance of sin and of conversion and to reduce them to merely personal matters; or vice versa,
the tendency to nullify the personal value of good and evil and to consider only their community
dimension. There also exists the danger, never totally eliminated, of routine ritualism that deprives
the sacrament of its full significance and formative effectiveness.
The restoration of a proper sense of sin is the first way of facing the grave spiritual crisis looming
over man today. But the sense of sin can only be restored through a clear reminder of the
unchangeable principles of reason and faith which the moral teaching of the church has always
upheld.
There are good grounds for hoping that a healthy sense of sin will once again flourish, especially
in the Christian world and in the church. This will be aided by sound catechetics, illuminated by the
biblical theology of the covenant, by an attentive listening and trustful openness to the magisterium
of the church, which; never ceases to enlighten consciences, and by an ever more careful practice
of the sacrament of penance.
CHAPTER II
25
"MYSTERIUM PIETATIS"
19. In order to understand sin we have had to direct our attention to its nature as made known to
us by the revelation of the economy of salvation: This is the mysterium iniquitatis. But in this
economy sin is not the main principle, still less the victor. Sin fights against another active principle
which-to use a beautiful and evocative expression of St. Paul-we can call the mysterium or
sacramentum pietatis. Man's sin would be the winner and in the end destructive, God's salvific
plan would remain incomplete or even totally defeated, if this mysterium pietatis were not made
part of the dynamism of history in order to conquer man's sin.
We find this expression in one of St. Paul's pastoral letters, the First Letter to Timothy. It appears
unexpectedly, as if by an exuberant inspiration. The apostle had previously devoted long
paragraphs of his message to his beloved disciple to an explanation of the meaning of the
ordering of the community (the liturgical order and the related hierarchical one). Next he had
spoken of the role of the heads of the community, before turning to the conduct of Timothy himself
in the church of the living God, the pillar and bulwark of the truth." Then at the end of the passage
suddenly, but with a profound purpose, he evokes the element which gives meaning to everything
that he has written: "Great indeed, we confess, is the mystery of our religion."(104)
Without in the least betraying the literal sense of the text, we can broaden this magnificent
theological insight of St. Paul into a more complete vision of the role which the truth proclaimed by
him plays in the economy of salvation: "Great indeed," we repeat with him, "is the mystery of our
religion," because it conquers sin.
But what is the meaning of this expression, in Paul's mind?
It Is Christ Himself
20. It is profoundly significant that when Paul presents this mysterium pietatis he simply
transcribes, without making a grammatical link with what he has just written,(105) three lines of a
Christological hymn which-in the opinion of authoritative scholars- has used in the Greek-speaking
Christian communities.
In the words of that hymn, full of theological content and rich in noble beauty, those first-century
believers professed their faith in the mystery of Christ, whereby:
He was made manifest in the reality of human flesh and was constituted by the Holy Spirit as
the Just One who offers himself for the unjust.
-
He appeared to the angels, having been made greater than them, and he was preached to the
nations as the bearer of salvation.
-
- He was believed in, in the world, as the one sent by the Father, and by the same Father
26
assumed into heaven as Lord.(106)
The mystery or sacrament of pietas, therefore, is the very mystery of Christ. It is, in a striking
summary, the mystery of the incarnation and redemption, of the full passover of Jesus, the Son of
God and son of Mary: the mystery of his passion and death, of his resurrection and glorification.
What St. Paul in quoting the phrases of the hymn wished to emphasize was that this mystery is
the hidden vital principle which makes the church the house of God, the pillar and bulwark of the
truth. Following the Pauline teaching, we can affirm that this same mystery of God's infinite loving
kindness toward us is capable of penetrating to the hidden roots of our iniquity! in order to evoke in
the soul a movement of conversion, in order to redeem it and set it on course toward
reconciliation.
St. John too undoubtedly referring to this mystery, but in his own characteristic language which
differs from St. Paul's, was able to write that "anyone born of God does not sin, but he who was
born of God keeps him, and the evil one does not touch him."(107) In this Johannine affirmation
there is an indication of hope, based on the divine promises: The Christian has received the
guarantee and the necessary strength not to sin. It is not a question therefore of a sinlessness
acquired through one's own virtue or even inherent in man, as the Gnostics thought. It is a result of
God's action. In order not to sin the Christian has knowledge of God, as St. John reminds us in this
same passage. But a little before he had written: "No one born of God commits sin; for God's seed
abides in him."(108) If by "God's seed" we understand, as some commentators suggest, Jesus the
Son of God, then we can say that in order not to sin or in order to gain freedom from sin the
Christian has within himself the presence of Christ and the mystery of Christ, which is the mystery
of God's loving kindness.
The Effort of the Christian
21. But there is another aspect to the mysterium pietatis: The loving kindness of God toward the
Christian must be matched by the piety of the Christian toward God. In this second meaning of the
word, piety (eusebeia) means precisely the conduct of the Christian who responds to God's
fatherly loving kindness with his own filial Piety.
In this sense too we can say with St. Paul that "great indeed is the mystery of our religion. In this
sense too piety, as a force for conversion and reconciliation, confronts iniquity and sin. In this case
too the essential aspects of the mystery of Christ are the object of piety in the sense that the
Christian accepts the mystery, contemplates it and draws from it the spiritual strength necessary
for living according to the Gospel. Here too one must say that "no one born of God commits sin";
but the expression has an imperative sense: Sustained by the mystery of Christ as by an interior
source of spiritual energy, the Christian,being a child of God, is warned not to sin and indeed
receives the commandment not to sin but to live in a manner worthy of "the house of God, that is,
the church of the living God."(109)
27
Toward a Reconciled Life
22. Thus the word of Scripture, as it reveals to us the mystery of pietas, opens the intellect to
conversion and reconciliation, understood not as lofty abstractions but as concrete Christian
values to be achieved in our daily lives.
Deceived by the loss of the sense of sin and at times tempted by an illusion of sinlessness which
is not at all Christian, the people of today too need to listen again to St. John's admonition, as
addressed to each one of them personally: "If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and
the truth is not in us,"(110) and indeed, "the whole world is in the power of the evil one."(111)
Every individual therefore is invited by the voice of divine truth to examine realistically his or her
conscience and to confess that he or she has been brought forth in iniquity, as we say in the
Miserere psalm."(112)
Nevertheless, though threatened by fear and despair, the people of today can feel uplifted by the
divine promise which opens to them the hope of full reconciliation.
The mystery of pietas, on God's part, is that mercy in which our Lord and Father-I repeat it again-is
infinitely rich.(113) As I said in my encyclical on the subject of divine mercy,(114) it is a love more
powerful than sin, stronger than death. When we realize that God's love for us does not cease in
the face of our sin or recoil before our offenses, but becomes even mere attentive and generous;
when we realize that this love went so far as cause the passion and death of the Word made flesh
who consented to redeem us at the price of his own blood, then we exclaim in gratitude: "Yes, the
Lord is rich in mercy,n and even: "The Lord is mercy."
The mystery of pietas is the path opened by divine mercy to a reconciled life.
PART THREE
THE PASTORAL MINISTRY OF PENANCE AND RECONCILIATIONPromoting Penance and Reconciliation23. To evoke
conversion and penance in man's heart and to offer him the gift of reconciliation is the specific mission of the church as
she continues the redemptive work of her divine founder. It is not a mission which consists merely of a few theoretical
statements and the putting forward of an ethical ideal unaccompanied by the energy with which to carry it out. Rather it
seeks to express itself in precise ministerial functions directed toward a concrete practice of penance and
reconciliation.We can call this ministry, which is founded on and illumined by the principles of faith which we have
explained and which is directed toward precise objectives and sustained by adequate means, the pastoral activity of
penance and reconciliation. Its point of departure is the church's conviction that man, to whom every form of pastoral
activity is directed but principally that of penance and reconciliation, is the man marked by sin whose striking image is to
be found in King David. Rebuked by the prophet Nathan, David faces squarely his own iniquity and confesses: "I have
sinned against the Lord,"(115) and proclaims: "I know my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me."(116) But he
also prays: "Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow,"(117) and he receives
28
the response of the divine mercy: "The Lord has put away your sin; you shall not die."(118)The church thus finds herself
face to face with man-with the whole human world-wounded by sin and affected by sin in the innermost depths of his
being. But at the same time he is moved by an unrestrainable desire to be freed from sin and, especially if he is a
Christian, he is aware that the mystery of pietas, Christ the Lord, is already acting in him and in the world by the power of
the redemption.The church's reconciling role must therefore be carried out in accordance with that intimate link which
closely connects the forgiveness and remission of the sin of each person with the fundamental and full reconciliation of
humanity which took place with the redemption. This link helps us to understand that, since sin is the active principle of
division-division between man and the nature created by God-only conversion from sin is capable of bringing about a
profound and lasting reconciliation wherever division has penetrated.I do not need to repeat what I have already said
about the importance of this "ministry of reconciliation,"(119) and of the pastoral activity whereby it is carried out in the
church's consciousness and life. This pastoral activity would be lacking an essential aspect of its being and failing in an
indispensable function if the "message of reconciliation"(120) were not proclaimed with clarity and tenacity in season and
out of season, and if the gift of reconciliation were not offered to the world. But it is worth repeating that the importance of
the ecclesial service of reconciliation extends beyond the confines of the church to the whole world.To speak of the
pastoral activity of penance and reconciliation, then, is to refer to all the tasks incumbent on the church, at all levels, for
their promotion. More concretely, to speak of this pastoral-activity is to evoke all the activities whereby the church,
through each and every one of her members-pastors and faithful, at all levels and in all spheres, and with all the means
at her disposal, words and actions, teaching and prayer-leads people individually or as groups to true penance and thus
sets them on the path to full reconciliation.The fathers of the synod, as representatives of their brother bishops and as
leaders of the people entrusted to them, concerned themselves with the most practical and concrete elements of this
pastoral activity. And I am happy to echo their concerns by associating myself with their anxieties and hopes, by
receiving the results of their research and experiences, and by encouraging them in their plans and achievements. May
they find in this part of the present apostolic exhortation the contribution which they themselves made to the synod, a
contribution the usefulness of which I wish to extend, through these pages, to the whole church.I therefore propose to call
attention to the essentials of the pastoral activity of penance and reconciliation by emphasizing, with the synod assembly,
the following two points:
1. The means used and the paths followed by the church in order to promote penance and reconciliation.
2. The sacrament par excellence of penance and reconciliation.
CHAPTER ONE
THE PROMOTION OF PENANCE AND RECONCILIATION: WAYS AND MEANS
24. In order to promote penance and reconciliation, the church has at her disposal two principal
means which were entrusted to her by her founder himself: catechesis and the sacraments. Their
use has always been considered by the church as fully in harmony with the requirements of her
salvific mission and at the same time as corresponding to the requirements and spiritual needs of
people in all ages. This use can be in forms and ways both old and new, among which it will be a
good idea to remember in particular what we can call, in the expression of my predecessor Paul
VI, the method of dialogue.
Dialogue
29
25. For the church, dialogue is in a certain sense a means and especially a way of carrying out her
activity in the modern world.
The Second Vatican Council proclaims that "the church, by virtue of her mission to shed on the
whole world the radiance of the gospel message, and to unify under one Spirit all people... stands
forth as a sign of that fraternal solidarity which allows honest dialogue and invigorates it." The
council adds that the church should be capable of "establishing an ever more fruitful dialogue
among all those who compose the one people of God" and also of "establishing a dialogue with
human society."(122)
My predecessor Paul VI devoted to dialogue a considerable part of his first encyclical, Ecclesism
Suam, in which he describes it and significantly characterizes it as the dialogue of salvation.(123)
The church in fact uses the method of dialogue in order the better to lead people-both those who
through baptism and the profession of faith acknowledge their membership of the Christian
community and also those who are outside-to conversion and repentance, along the path of a
profound renewal of their own consciences and lives in the light of the mystery of the redemption
and salvation accomplished by Christ and entrusted to the ministry of his church. Authentic
dialogue, therefore, is aimed above all at the rebirth of individuals through interior conversion and
repentance, but always with profound respect for consciences and with patience and at the stepby-step pace indispensable for modern conditions.
Pastoral dialogue aimed at reconciliation continues to be today a fundamental task of the church in
different spheres and at different levels.
The church in the first place promotes an ecumenical dialogue, that is, with churches and ecclesial
communities which profess faith in Christ, the Son of God and only savior. She also promotes
dialogue with the other communities of people who are seeking God and wish to have a
relationship of communion with him.
At the basis of this dialogue with the other churches and Christian communities and with the other
religions, and as a condition of her credibility and effectiveness, there must be a sincere effort of
permanent and renewed dialogue within the Catholic Church herself. She is aware that, by her
nature, she is the sacrament of the universal communion of charity;(124) but she is equally aware
of the tensions within her, tensions which risk becoming factors of division.
The heartfelt and determined invitation which was already extended by my predecessor in
preparation for the 1975 Holy Year(125) is also valid at the present moment. In order to overcome
conflicts and to ensure that normal tensions do not prove harmful to the unity of the church, we
must all apply to ourselves the word of God; we must relinquish our own subjective views and
seek the truth where it is to be found, namely in the divine word itself and in the authentic
30
interpretation of that word provided by the magisterium of the church. In this light, listening to one
another, respect, refraining from all hasty judgments, patience, the ability to avoid subordinating
the faith which unites to the opinions, fashions and ideological choices which divide-these are all
qualities of a dialogue within the church which must be persevering, open and sincere. Obviously
dialogue would not have these qualities and would not become a factor of reconciliation if the
magisterium were not heeded and accepted.
Thus actively engaged in seeking her own internal communion, the Catholic Church can address
an appeal for reconciliation to the other churches with which there does not exist full communion,
as well as to the other religions and even to all those who are seeking God with a sincere heart.
This she has been doing for some time.
In the light of the council and of the magisterium of my predecessors, whose precious inheritance I
have received and am making every effort to preserve and put into effect, I can affirm that the
Catholic Church at every level is committed to frank ecumenical dialogue, without facile optimism
but also without distrust and without hesitation or delays. The fundamental laws which she seeks
to follow in this dialogue are, on the one hand, the conviction that only a spiritual ecumenismnamely an ecumenism founded on common prayer and in a common docility to the one Lordenables us to make a sincere and serious response to the other exigencies of ecumenical
action.(126) The other law is the conviction that a certain facile irenicism in doctrinal and
especially dogmatic matters could perhaps lead to a form of superficial and short-lived
coexistence, but it could not lead to that profound and stable communion which we all long for.
This communion will be reached at the hour willed by divine providence. But in order to reach it,
the Catholic Church, for her part, knows that she must be open and sensitive to all "the truly
Christian endowments from our common heritage which are to be found among our separated
brethren";(127) but she also knows that she must likewise base a frank and constructive dialogue
upon a clarity regarding her own positions and upon fidelity and consistency with the faith
transmitted and defined in accordance with the perennial tradition of her magisterium.
Notwithstanding the threat of a certain defeatism and despite the inevitable slowness which
rashness could never correct, the Catholic Church continues with all other Christian brethren to
seek the paths to unity, and with the followers of the other religions she continues to seek to have
sincere dialogue. May this inter-religious dialogue lead to the overcoming of all attitudes of
hostility, distrust, mutual condemnation and even mutual invective, which is the precondition for
encounter at least in faith in one God and in the certainty of eternal life for the immortal soul. May
the Lord especially grant that ecumenical dialogue will also lead to a sincere reconciliation
concerning everything that we already have in common with the other Christian churches- faith in
Jesus Christ, the Son of God made man, our savior and Lord; a listening to the word; the study of
revelation and the sacrament of baptism.
To the extent to which the church is capable of generating active harmony-unity in variety-within
herself and of offering herself as a witness to and humble servant of reconciliation with the other
31
churches and ecclesial communities and the other religions, she becomes, in the expressive
definition of St. Augustine, a "reconciled world."(128) Then she will be able to be a sign of
reconciliation in the world and for the world.
The church is aware of the extreme seriousness of the situation created by the forces of division
and war, which today constitute a grave threat not only to the balance and harmony of nations but
to the very survival of humanity, and she feels it her duty to offer and suggest her own unique
collaboration for the overcoming of conflicts and the restoration of concord.
It is a complex and delicate dialogue of reconciliation in which the church is engaged, especially
through the work of the Holy See and its different organisms. The Holy See already endeavors to
intervene with the leaders of nations and the heads of the various international bodies or seeks to
associate itself with them, conduct a dialogue with them and encourage them to dialogue with one
another for the sake of reconciliation in the midst of the many conflicts. It does this not for ulterior
motives or hidden interests. since it has none-but "out of a humanitarian concern,"(129) placing its
institutional structure and moral authority, which are altogether unique, at the service of concord
and peace. It does this in the conviction that as "in war two parties rise against one another" so "in
the question of peace there are also necessarily two parties which must know how to commit
themselves," and in this "one finds the true meaning of a dialogue for peace."(130)
The church engages in dialogue for reconciliation also through the bishops in the competency and
responsibility proper to them, either individually in the direct;on of their respective local churches
or united in their episcopal conferences, with the collaboration of the priests and of all those who
make up the Christian communities. They truly fulfill their task when they promote this
indispensable dialogue and proclaim the human and Christian need for reconciliation and peace.
In communion with their pastors, the laity who have as "their own field of evangelizing activity...the
vast and complicated world of politics, society...economics...(and) international life,"(131) are
called upon to engage directly in dialogue or to work for dialogue aimed at reconciliation. Through
them too the church carries out her reconciling activity. Thus the fundamental presupposition and
secure basis for any lasting renewal of society and for peace between nations lies in the
regeneration of hearts through conversion and penance.
It should be repeated that, on the part of the church and her members, dialogue, whatever form it
takes (and these forms can be and are very diverse since the very concept of dialogue has an
analogical value) can never begin from an attitude of indifference to the truth. On the contrary, it
must begin from a presentation of the truth, offered in a calm way, with respect for the intelligence
and consciences of others. The dialogue of reconciliation can never replace or attenuate the
proclamation of the truth of the Gospel, the precise goal of which is conversion from sin and
communion with Christ and the church. It must be at the service of the transmission and
realization of that truth through the means left by Christ to the church for the pastoral activity of
reconciliation, namely catechesis and penance.
32
Catechesis
26. In the vast area in which the church has the mission of operating through dialogue, the
pastoral ministry of penance and reconciliation is directed to the members of the body of the
church principally through an adequate catechesis concerning the two distinct and complementary
realities to which the synod fathers gave a particular importance and which they emphasized in
some of the concluding propositions: These are penance and reconciliation. Catechesis is
therefore the first means to be used.
At the basis of the synod's very opportune recommendation is a fundamental presupposition; What
is pastoral is not opposed to what is doctrinal. Nor can pastoral action prescind from doctrinal
content, from which in fact it draws its substance and real validity. Now if the church is the pillar
and bulwark of the truth'(132) and is placed in the world as mother and teacher, how could she
neglect the task of teaching the truth which constitutes a path of life?
From the pastors of the church one expects, first of all, catechesis on reconciliation. This must be
founded on the teaching of the Bible, especially the New Testament, on the need to rebuild the
covenant with God in Christ the redeemer and reconciler. And in the light of this new communion
and friendship, and as an extension of it, it must be founded on the teaching concerning the need
to be reconciled with one's brethren, even if this means interrupting the offering of the
sacrifice.(133) Jesus strongly insists on this theme of fraternal reconciliation: for example, when he
invites us to turn the other cheek to the one who strikes us, and to give our cloak too to the one
who has taken our coat,(134) or when he instills the law of forgiveness: forgiveness which each
one receives in the measure that he or she foresee forgiveness to be offered even to
enemies,(136) forgiveness to be granted seventy times seven times,(137) which means in practice
without any limit. On these conditions, which are realizable only in a genuinely evangelical climate,
it is possible to have a true reconciliation between individuals, families, communities, nations and
peoples. From these biblical data on reconciliation there will naturally derive a theological
catechesis, which in its synthesis will also integrate the elements of psychology, sociology and the
other human sciences which can serve to clarify situations, describe problems accurately and
persuade listeners or readers to make concrete resolutions.
The pastors of the church are also expected to provide catechesis on penance. Here too the
richness of the biblical message must be its source. With regard to penance this message
emphasizes particularly its value for conversion, which is the term that attempts to translate the
word in the Greek text, metanoia,(138) which literally means to allow the spirit to be overturned in
order to make it turn toward God. These are also the two fundamental elements which emerge
from the parable of the son who was lost and found: his "coming to himself"(139) and his decision
to return to his father. There can be no reconciliation unless these attitudes of conversion come
first, and catechesis should explain them with concepts and terms adapted to people's various
ages and their differing cultural, moral and social backgrounds.
33
This is a first value of penance and it extends into a second: Penance also means repentance.
The two meanings of metanoia appear in the significant instruction given by Jesus: "If your brother
repents (returns to you), forgive him; and if he sins against you seven times in the day, and turns
to you seven times and says, 'I repent,' you must forgive him."(140) A good catechesis will show
how repentance, just like conversion, is far from being a superficial feeling but a real overturning of
the soul.
A third value is contained in penance, and this is the movement whereby the preceding attitudes of
conversion and repentance are manifested externally: This is doing penance. This meaning is
clearly perceptible in the term metanoia, as used by John the Baptist in the texts of the
synoptics.(141) To do penance means above all to restablish the balance and harmony broken by
sin, to change direction even at the cost of sacrifice.
A catechesis on penance, therefore, and one that is as complete and adequate as possible, is
absolutely essential at a time like ours when dominant attitudes in psychology and social behavior
are in such contrast with the threefold value just illustrated. Contemporary man seems to find it
harder than ever to recognize his own mistakes and to decide to retrace his steps and begin again
after changing course. He seems very reluctant to say "I repent" or "I am sorry." He seems to
refuse instinctively and often irresistibly anything that is penance in the sense of a sacrifice
accepted and carried out for the correction of sin. In this regard I would like to emphasize that the
church's penitential discipline, even though it has been mitigated for some time, cannot be
abandoned without grave harm both to the interior life of individual Christians and of the ecclesial
community and also to their capacity for missionary influence. It is not uncommon for nonChristians to be surprised at the negligible witness of true penance on the part of Christ's
followers. It is clear, however, that Christian penance will only be authentic if it is inspired by love
and not by mere fear; if it consists in a serious effort to crucify the " old man " so that the " new"
can be born by the power of Christ; if it takes as its model Christ, who though he was innocent
chose the path of poverty, patience, austerity and, one can say, the penitential life.
As the synod recalled, the pastors of the church are also expected to provide catechesis on
conscience and its formation. This too is a very relevant topic in view of the fact that in the
upheavals to which our present culture is subjected this interior sanctuary, man's innermost self,
his conscience, is too often attacked, put to the test, confused and obscured. Valuable guidelines
for a wise catechesis on conscience can be found both in the doctors of the church and in the
theology of the Second Vatican Council, and especially in the documents on the church in the
modern world(142) and on religious liberty.(143) Along these same lines, Pope Paul VI often
reminded us of the nature and role of conscience in our life.(144) I myself, following his footsteps,
miss no opportunity to throw light on this most lofty element of man's greatness and dignity,(145)
this "sort of moral sense which leads us to discern what is good and what is evil...like an inner eye,
a visual capacity of the spirit, able to guide our steps along the path of good." And I have reiterated
the need to form one's conscience, lest it become "a force which is destructive of the true
34
humanity of the person, rather than that holy place where God reveals to him his true good."(146)
On other points too, of no less relevance for reconciliation, one looks to the pastors of the church
for catechesis.
On the sense of sin, which, as I have said, has become considerably weakened in our world.
On temptation and temptations: The Lord Jesus himself, the Son of God, "who in every respect
has been tempted as we are, yet without sin,"(147) allowed himself to be tempted by the evil
one(148) in order to show that, like himself, his followers too would be subjected to temptation,
and in order to show how one should behave when subjected to temptation. For those who
beseech the Father not to be tempted beyond their own strength(149) and not to succumb to
temptation,(150) and for those who do not expose themselves to occasions of sin, being subjected
to temptation does not mean that they have sinned; rather it is an opportunity for growing in fidelity
and consistency through humility and watchfulness.
Catechesis is also expected on fasting: This can be practiced in old forms and new as a sign of
conversion, repentance and personal mortification and, at the same time, as a sign of union with
Christ crucified and of solidarity with the starving and suffering.
Catechesis on almsgiving: This is a means of making charity a practical thing by sharing what one
possesses with those suffering the consequences of poverty.
Catechesis on the intimate connection which links the overcoming of divisions in the world with
perfect communion with God and among people, which is the eschatological purpose of the
church.
Catechesis on the concrete circumstances in which reconciliation has to be achieved (in the
family, in the civil community, in social structures) and particularly catechesis on the four
reconciliations which repair the four fundamental rifts; reconciliation of man with God, with self,
with the brethren and with the whole of creation.
Nor can the church omit, without serious mutilation of her essential message, a constant
catechesis on what the traditional Christian language calls the four last things of man: death,
judgment (universal and particular), hell and heaven. In a culture which tends to imprison man in
the earthly life at which he is more or less successful, the pastors of the church are asked to
provide a catechesis which will reveal and illustrate with the certainties of faith what comes after
the present life: beyond the mysterious gates of death, an eternity of joy in communion with God or
the punishment of separation from him. Only in this eschatological vision can one realize the exact
nature of sin and feel decisively moved to penance and reconciliation.
35
Pastors who are zealous and creative never lack opportunities for imparting this broad and varied
catechesis, taking into account the different degrees of education and religious formation of those
to whom they speak. Such opportunities are often given by the biblical readings and the rites of
the Mass and the sacraments, as also by the circumstances of their celebration. For the same
purpose many initiatives can be taken such as sermons, lectures, discussions, meetings, courses
of religious education, etc., as happens in many places. Here I wish to point out in particular the
importance and effectiveness of the old-style popular missions for the purposes of such
catechesis. If adapted to the peculiar needs of the present time, such missions can be, today as
yesterday, a useful instrument of religious education also regarding penance and reconciliation.
In view of the great relevance of reconciliation based on conversion in the delicate field of human
relationships and social interaction at all levels, including the international level, catechesis cannot
fail to inculcate the valuable contribution of the church's social teaching. The timely and precise
teaching of my predecessors from Pope Leo XIII onward, to which was added the substantial
contribution the pastoral constitution Gaudium et Spes of the Second Vatican Council and the
contributions of the different episcopates elicited by various circumstances in their respective
countries, has made up an ample and solid body of doctrine. This regards the many different
needs inherent in the life of the human community, in relationships between individuals, families,
groups in their different spheres and in the very constitution of a society that intends to follow the
moral law, which is the foundation of civilization.
At the basis of this social teaching of the church there is obviously to be found the vision which the
church draws from the word of God concerning the rights and duties of individuals, the family and
the community; concerning the value of liberty and the nature of justice, concerning the primacy of
charity, concerning the dignity of the human person and the exigencies of the common good to
which politics and the economy itself must be directed. Upon these fundamental principles of the
social magisterium, which confirm and repropose the universal dictates of reason and of the
conscience of peoples, there rests in great part the hope for a peaceful solution to many social
conflicts and, in short, the hope for universal reconciliation.
The Sacraments
27. The second divinely instituted means which the church offers for the pastoral activity of
penance and reconciliation is constituted by the sacraments.
In the mysterious dynamism of the sacraments, so rich in symbolism and content, one can discern
one aspect which is not always emphasized: Each sacrament, over and above its own proper
grace, is also a sign of penance and reconciliation. Therefore in each of them it is possible to
relive these dimensions of the spirit.
Baptism is of course a salvific washing which, as St Peter says, is effective "not as a removal of
36
dirt from the body but as an appeal to God for a clear conscience."(151) It is death, burial and
resurrection with the dead, buried and risen Christ.(152) It is a gift of the Holy Spirit through
Christ.(153) But this essential and original constituent of Christian baptism, far from eliminating the
penitential element already present in the baptism which Jesus himself received from John "to
fulfill all righteousness,"(154) in fact enriches it. In other words, it is a fact of conversion and of
reintegration into the right order of relationships with God, of reconciliation with God, with the
elimination of the original stain and the consequent introduction into the great family of the
reconciled.
Confirmation likewise, as a ratification of baptism and together with baptism a sacrament of
initiation, in conferring the fullness of the Holy Spirit and in bringing the Christian life to maturity,
signifies and accomplishes thereby a greater conversion of the heart and brings about a more
intimate and effective membership of the same assembly of the reconciled, which is the church of
Christ.
The definition which St. Augustine gives of the eucharist as "sacramentum pietatis, signum
unitatis, vinculum caritatis"(155) clearly illustrates the effects of personal sanctification (pietas) and
community reconciliation (unitas and caritas) which derive from the very essence of the eucharistic
mystery as an unbloody renewal of the sacrifice of the cross, the source of salvation and of
reconciliation for all people.
However, it must be remembered that the church, guided by faith in this great sacrament, teaches
that no Christian who is conscious of grave sin can receive the eucharist before having obtained
God's forgiveness. This we read in the instruction Eucharisticum Mysterium which, duly approved
by Paul VI, fully confirms the teaching of the Council of Trent: "The eucharist is to be offered to the
faithful also 'as a remedy, which frees us from daily faults and preserves us from mortal sin' and
they are to be shown the fitting way of using the penitential parts of the liturgy of the Mass. The
person who wishes to receive holy communion is to be reminded of the precept: Let a man
examine himself" (1 Cor 11:28). And the church's custom shows that such an examination is
necessary, because no one who is conscious of being in mortal sin, however contrite he may
believe himself to be, is to approach the holy eucharist without having first made a sacramental
confession. If this person finds himself in need and has no means of going to confession, he
should first make an act of perfect contrition."(116)
The sacrament of orders is intended to give to the church the pastors who, besides being teachers
and guides, are called to be witnesses and workers of unity, builders of the family of God, and
defenders and preservers of the communion of this family against the sources of division and
dispersion.
The sacrament of matrimony, the exaltation of human love under the action of grace, is a sign of
the love of Christ for the church. But it is also a sign of the victory which Christ grants to couples in
37
resisting the forces which deform and destroy love, in order that the family born from this
sacrament may be a sign also of the reconciled and reconciling church for a world reconciled in all
its structures and institutions.
Finally, the anointing of the sick in the trial of illness and old age and especially at the Christian's
final hour is a sign of definitive conversion to the Lord and of total acceptance of suffering and
death as a penance for sins. And in this is accomplished supreme reconciliation with the Father.
However, among the sacraments there is one which, though it has often been called the
sacrament of confession because of the accusation of sins which takes place in it, can more
appropriately be considered by antonomasia the sacrament of penance, as it is in fact called. And
thus it is the sacrament of conversion and reconciliation. The recent synod particularly concerned
itself with this sacrament because of its importance with regard to reconciliation.
CHAPTER TWO
THE SACRAMENT OF PENANCE AND RECONCILIATION
28. In all its phases and at all its levels the synod considered with the greatest attention that
sacramental sign which represents and at the same time accomplishes penance and
reconciliation. This sacrament in itself certainly does not contain all possible ideas of conversion
and reconciliation. From the very beginning, in fact, the church has recognized and used many
and varying forms of penance. Some are liturgical or paraliturgical and include the penitential actin
the Mass, services of atonement and pilgrimages; others are of an ascetical character, such as
fasting. But of all such acts none is more significant, more divinely efficacious or more lofty and at
the same time easily accessible as a rite than the sacrament of penance.
From its preparatory stage and then in the numerous interventions during the sessions, in the
group meetings and in the final propositions, the synod took into account the statement frequently
made with varying nuances and emphases, namely: The sacrament of penance is in crisis. The
synod took note of this crisis. It recommended a more profound catechesis, but it also
recommended a no less profound analysis of a theological, historical, psychological, sociological
and juridical character of penance in general and of the sacrament of penance in particular. In all
of this the synod's intention was to clarify the reasons for the crisis and to open the way to a
positive solution for the good of humanity. Meanwhile, from the synod itself the church has
received a clear confirmation of its faith regarding the sacrament which gives to every Christian
and to the whole community of believers the certainty of forgiveness through the power of the
redeeming blood of Christ.
It is good to renew and reaffirm this faith at a moment when it might be weakening, losing
something of its completeness or entering into an area of shadow and silence, threatened as it is
38
by the negative elements of the above-mentioned crisis. For the sacrament of confession is indeed
being undermined, on the one hand by the obscuring of the mortal and religious conscience, the
lessening of a sense of sin, the distortion of the concept of repentance and the lack of effort to live
an authentically Christian life. And on the other hand, it is being undermined by the sometimes
widespread idea that one can obtain forgiveness directly from God, even in a habitual way, without
approaching the sacrament of reconciliation. A further negative influence is the routine of a
sacramental practice sometimes lacking in fervor and real spontaneity, deriving perhaps from a
mistaken and distorted idea of the effects of the sacrament.
It is therefore appropriate to recall the principal aspects of this great sacrament.
"Whose Sins You Shall Forgive"
29. The books of the Old and New Testament provide us with the first and fundamental fact
concerning the Lord's mercy and forgiveness. In the Psalms and in the preaching of the prophets,
the name merciful is perhaps the one most often given to the Lord, in contrast to the persistent
cliche whereby the God of the Old Testament is presented above all as severe and vengeful. Thus
in the Psalms there is a long sapiential passage drawing from the Exodus tradition, which recalls
God's kindly action in the midst of his people. This action, though represented in an
anthropomorphic way, is perhaps one of the most eloquent Old Testament proclamations of the
divine mercy. Suffice it to quote the verse: "Yet he, being compassionate, forgave their iniquity and
did not destroy them; he restrained his anger often, and did not stir up all his wrath. He
remembered that they were but flesh, a wind that passes and comes not again."(157)
In the fullness of time the Son of God, coming as the lamb who takes away and bears upon
himself the sin of the world appears as the one who has the power both to judge(159) and to
forgive sins,(160) and who has come not to condemn but to forgive and save.(161)
Now this power to " forgive sins" Jesus confers through the Holy Spirit upon ordinary men,
themselves subject to the snare of sin, namely his apostles: "Receive the Holy Spirit. Whose sins
you shall forgive, they are forgiven; whose sins you shall retain, they are retained."(162) This is
one of the most awe-inspiring innovations of the Gospel! He confers this power on the apostles
also as something which they can transmit-as the church has understood it from the beginning-to
their successors, charged by the same apostles with the mission and responsibility of continuing
their work as proclaimers of the Gospel and ministers of Christ's redemptive work.
Here there is seen in all its grandeur the figure of the minister of the sacrament of penance who by
very ancient custom is called the confessor.
Just as at the altar where he celebrates the eucharist and just as in each one of the sacraments,
so the priest, as the minister of penance, acts "in persona Christi" The Christ whom he makes
39
present and who accomplishes the mystery of the forgiveness of sins is the Christ who appears as
the brother of man,(163) the merciful high priest, faithful and compassionate,(164) the shepherd
intent on finding the lost sheep,(165) the physician who heals and comforts,(166) the one master
who teaches the truth and reveals the ways of God,(167) the judge of the living and the dead,(168)
who judges according to the truth and not according to appearances.(169)
This is undoubtedly the most difficult and sensitive, the most exhausting and demanding ministry
of the priest, but also one of the most beautiful and consoling. Precisely for this reason and with
awareness also of the strong recommendation of the synod, I will never grow weary of exhorting
my brothers, the bishops and priests, to the faithful and diligent performance of ministry.(170)
Before the consciences of the faithful, who open up to him with a mixture of fear and trust, the
confessor is called to a lofty task which is one of service and penance and human reconciliation. It
is a task of learning the weaknesses and falls of those faithful people, assessing their desire for
renewal and their efforts to achieve it, discerning the action of the Holy Spirit in their hearts,
imparting to them a forgiveness which God alone can grant, "celebrating" their reconciliation with
the Father, portrayed in the parable of the prodigal son, reinstating these redeemed sinners in the
ecclesial community with their brothers and sisters, and paternally admonishing these penitents
with a firm, encouraging and friendly "Do not sin again."(171)
For the effective performance of this ministry, the confessor must necessarily have human
qualities of prudence, discretion, discernment and a firmness tempered by gentleness and
kindness. He must likewise have a serious and careful preparation, not fragmentary but complete
and harmonious, in the different branches of theology, pedagogy and psychology, in the
methodology of dialogue and above all in a living and communicable knowledge of the word of
God. But it is even more necessary that he should live an intense and genuine spiritual life. In
order to lead others along the path of Christian perfection the minister of penance himself must
first travel this path. More by actions than by long speeches he must give proof of real experience
of lived prayer, the practice of the theological and moral virtues of the Gospel, faithful obedience to
the will of God, love of the church and docility to her magisterium.
All this fund of human gifts, Christian virtues and pastoral capabilities has to be worked for and is
only acquired with effort. Every priest must be trained for the ministry of sacramental penance
from his years in the seminary, not only through the study of dogmatic, moral, spiritual and
pastoral theology (which are simply parts of a whole), but also through the study of the human
sciences, training in dialogue and especially in how to deal with people in the pastoral context. He
must then be guided and looked after in his first activities. He must always ensure his own
improvement and updating by means of permanent study. What a wealth of grace, true life and
spiritual radiation would be poured out on the church if every priest were careful never to miss
through negligence or various excuses the appointment with the faithful in the confessional and if
he were even more careful never to go to it unprepared or lacking the necessary human qualities
and spiritual and pastoral preparation!
40
In this regard I cannot but recall with devout admiration those extraordinary apostles of the
confessional such as St. John Nepomucene, St. John Vianney, St. Joseph Cafasso and St.
Leopold of Castelnuovo, to mention only the best-known confessors whom the church has added
to the list of her saints. But I also wish to pay homage to the innumerable host of holy and almost
always anonymous confessors to whom is owed the salvation of so many souls who have been
helped by them in conversion, in the struggle against sin and temptation, in spiritual progress and,
in a word, in achieving holiness. I do not hesitate to say that even the great canonized saints are
generally the fruit of those confessionals, and not only the saints but also the spiritual patrimony of
the church and the flowering of a civilization permeated with the Christian spirit! Praise then to this
silent army of our brothers who have served well and serve each day the cause of reconciliation
through the ministry of sacramental penance!
The Sacrament of Forgiveness
30. From the revelation of the value of this ministry and power to forgive sins, conferred by Christ
on the apostles and their successors, there developed in the church an awareness of the sign of
forgiveness, conferred through the sacrament of penance. It is the certainty that the Lord Jesus
himself instituted and entrusted to the church-as a gift of his goodness and loving kindness(172) to
be offered to all-a special sacrament for the forgiveness of sins committed after baptism.
The practice of this sacrament, as regards its celebration and form, has undergone a long process
of development as is attested to by the most ancient sacramentaries, the documents of councils
and episcopal synods, the preaching of the fathers and the teaching of the doctors of the church.
But with regard to the substance of the sacrament there has always remained firm and unchanged
in the consciousness of the church the certainty that, by the will of Christ, forgiveness is offered to
each individual by means of sacramental absolution given by the ministers of penance. It is a
certainty reaffirmed with particular vigor both by the Council of Trent(173) and by the Second
Vatican Council: "Those who approach the sacrament of penance obtain pardon from God's mercy
for the offenses committed against him, and are, at the same time, reconciled with the church
which they have wounded by their sins and which by charity, by example and by prayer works for
their conversion."(174) And as an essential element of faith concerning the value and purpose of
penance it must be reaffirmed that our savior Jesus Christ instituted in his church the sacrament of
penance so that the faithful who have fallen into sin after baptism might receive grace and be
reconciled with God (175)
The church's faith in this sacrament involves certain other fundamental truths which cannot be
disregarded. The sacramental rite of penance, in its evolution and variation of actual forms, has
always preserved and highlighted these truths. When it recommended a reform of this rite, the
Second Vatican Council intended to ensure that it would express these truths even more
clearly,(176) and this has come about with the new Rite of Penance.(177) For the latter has made
its own the whole of the teaching brought together by the Council of Trent, transferring it from its
41
particular historical context (that of a resolute effort to clarify doctrine in the face of the serious
deviations from the church's genuine teaching), in order to translate it faithfully into terms more in
keeping with the context of our own time.
Some Fundamental Convictions
31. The truths mentioned above, powerfully and clearly confirmed by the synod and contained in
the propositions, can be summarized in the following convictions of faith, to which are connected
all the other affirmations of the Catholic doctrine on the sacrament of penance.
I. The first conviction is that for a Christian the sacrament of penance is the primary way of
obtaining forgiveness and the remission of serious sin committed after baptism. Certainly the
Savior and his salvific action are not so bound to a sacramental sign as to be unable in any period
or area of the history of salvation to work outside and above the sacraments. But in the school of
faith we learn that the same Savior desired and provided that the simple and precious sacraments
of faith would ordinarily be the effective means through which his redemptive power passes and
operates. It would therefore be foolish, as well as presumptuous, to wish arbitrarily to disregard the
means of grace and salvation which the Lord has provided and, in the specific case, to claim to
receive forgiveness while doing without the sacrament which was instituted by Christ precisely for
forgiveness. The renewal of the rites carried out after the council does not sanction any illusion or
alteration in this direction. According to the church's intention, it was and is meant to stir up in each
one of us a new impulse toward the renewal of our interior attitude; toward a deeper
understanding of the nature of the sacrament of penance; toward a reception of the sacrament
which is more filled with faith, not anxious but trusting; toward a more frequent celebration of the
sacrament which is seen to be completely filled with the Lord's merciful love.
II. The second conviction concerns the function of the sacrament of penance for those who have
recourse to it. According to the most ancient traditional idea, the sacrament is a kind of judicial
action; but this takes place before a tribunal of mercy rather than of strict and rigorous justice,
which is comparable to human tribunals only by analogy namely insofar as sinners reveal their
sins and their condition as creatures subject to sin; they commit themselves to renouncing and
combating sin; accept the punishment (sacramental penance) which the confessor imposes on
them and receive absolution from him.
But as it reflects on the function of this sacrament, the church's consciousness discerns in it, over
and above the character of judgment in the sense just mentioned, a healing of a medicinal
character. And this is linked to the fact that the Gospel frequently presents Christ as healer,(179)
while his redemptive work is often called, from Christian antiquity, medicina salutis. "I wish to heal,
not accuse," St. Augustine said, referring to the exercise of the pastoral activity regarding
penance,(180) and it is thanks to the medicine of confession that the experience of sin does not
degenerate into despair.(181) The Rite of Penance alludes to this healing aspect of the
42
sacrament,(182) to which modern man is perhaps more sensitive, seeing as he does in sin the
element of error but even more the element of weakness and human frailty.
Whether as a tribunal of mercy or a place of spiritual healing, under both aspects the sacrament
requires a knowledge of the sinner's heart in order to be able to judge and absolve, to cure and
heal. Precisely for this reason the sacrament involves on the part of the penitent a sincere and
complete confession of sins. This therefore has a raison d'etre not only inspired by ascetical
purposes (as an exercise of humility and mortification), but one that is inherent in the very nature
of the sacrament.
III. The third conviction, which is one that I wish to emphasize, concerns the realities or parts
which make up the sacramental sign of forgiveness and reconciliation. Some of these realities are
acts of the penitent, of varying importance but each indispensable either for the validity, the
completeness or the fruitfulness of the sign.
First of all, an indispensable condition is the rectitude and clarity of the penitent's conscience.
People cannot come to true and genuine repentance until they realize that sin is contrary to the
ethical norm written in their in most being;(183) until they admit that they have had a personal and
responsible experience of this contrast; until they say not only that "sin exists" but also "I have
sinned"; until they admit that sin has introduced a division into their consciences which then
pervades their whole being and separates them from God and from their brothers and sisters. The
sacramental sign of this clarity of conscience is the act traditionally called the examination of
conscience, an act that must never be one of anxious psychological introspection, but a sincere
and calm comparison with the interior moral law, with the evangelical norms proposed by the
church, with Jesus Christ himself, who is our teacher and model of life, and with the heavenly
Father, who calls us to goodness and perfection.(184)
But the essential act of penance, on the part of the penitent, is contrition, a clear and decisive
rejection of the sin committed, together with a resolution not to commit it again,(185) out of the
love which one has for God and which is reborn with repentance. Understood in this way,
contrition is therefore the beginning and the heart of conversion, of that evangelical metanoia
which brings the person back to God like the prodigal son returning to his father, and which has in
the sacrament of penance its visible sign and which perfects attrition. Hence "upon this contrition
of heart depends the truth of penance."(186)
While reiterating everything that the church, inspired by God's word, teaches about contrition, I
particularly wish to emphasize here just one aspect of this doctrine. It is one that should be better
known and considered. Conversion and contention are often considered under the aspect of the
undeniable demands which they involve and under the aspect of the mortification which they
impose for the purpose of bringing about a radical change of life. But we all to well to recall and
emphasize the fact that contrition and conversion are even more a drawing near to the holiness of
43
God, a rediscovery of one's true identity, which has been upset and disturbed by sin, a liberation in
the very depth of self and thus a regaining of lost joy, the joy of being saved,(187) which the
majority of people in our time are no longer capable of experiencing.
We therefore understand why, from the earliest Christian times, in line with the apostles and with
Christ, the church has included in the sacramental sign of penance the confession of sins. This
latter takes on such importance that for centuries the usual name of the sacrament has been and
still is that of confession. The confession of sins is required, first of all, because the sinner must be
known by the person who in the sacrament exercises the role of judge. He has to evaluate both
the seriousness of the sins and the repentance of the penitent; he also exercises the role of the
healer and must acquaint himself with the condition of the sick person in order to treat and heal
him. But the individual confession also has the value of a sign: a sign of the meeting of the sinner
with the mediation of the church in the person of the minister, a sign of the person's revealing of
self as a sinner in the sight of God and the church,.of facing his own sinful condition in the eyes of
God. The confession of sins therefore cannot be reduced to a mere attempt at psychological selfliberation even though it corresponds to that legitimate and natural need, inherent in the human
heart, to open oneself to another. It is a liturgical act, solemn in its dramatic nature, yet humble
and sober in the grandeur of its meaning. It is the act of the prodigal son who returns to his Father
and is welcomed by him with the kiss of peace. It is an act of honesty and courage. It is an act of
entrusting oneself, beyond sin, to the mercy that forgives.(188) Thus we understand why the
confession of sins must ordinarily be individual not collective, just as sin is a deeply personal
matter. But at the same time this confession in a way forces sin out of the secret of the heart and
thus out of the area of pure individuality, emphasizing its social character as well, for through the
minister of penance it is the ecclesial community, which has been wounded by sin, that welcomes
anew the repentant and forgiven sinner.
The other essential stage of the sacrament of penance this time along to the confessor as judge
and healer, a figure of God the Father welcoming and forgiving the one who returns: This is the
absolution. The words which express it and the gestures that accompany it in the old and in the
new Rite of Penance are significantly simple in their-grandeur. The sacramental formula "I absolve
you" and the imposition of the hand and the Sign of the Cross made over the penitent show that at
this moment the contrite and converted sinner comes into contact with the power and mercy of
God. It is the moment at which, in response to the penitent, the Trinity becomes present in order to
blot out sin and restore innocence. And the saving power of the passion, death and resurrection of
Jesus is also imparted to the penitent as the "mercy stronger than sin and offense," as I defined it
in my encyclical Dives in Misericordia. God is always the one who is principally offended by sin-
"Tibi soli peccavi!"-and God alone can forgive. Hence the absolution that the priest, the minister of
forgiveness, though himself a sinner, grants to the penitent is the effective sign of the intervention
of the Father in every absolution and the sign of the "resurrection" from "spiritual death" which is
renewed each time that the sacrament of penance is administered. Only faith can give us certainty
that at that moment every sin is forgiven and blotted out by the mysterious intervention of the
44
Savior.
Satisfaction is the final act which crowns the sacramental sign of penance. In some countries the
act which the forgiven and absolved penitent agrees to perform after receiving absolution is called
precisely the penance. What is the meaning of this satisfaction that one makes or the penance
that one performs? Certainly it is not a price that one pays for the sin absolved and for the
forgiveness obtained: No human price can match what is obtained, which is the fruit of Christ's
precious blood. Acts of satisfaction-which, while remaining simple and humble, should be made to
express more clearly all that they signify-mean a number of valuable things: They are the sign of
the personal commitment that the Christian has made to God in the sacrament to begin a new life
(and therefore they should not be reduced to mere formulas to be recited, but should consist of
acts of worship, charity, mercy or reparation). They include the idea that the pardoned sinner is
able to join his own physical and spiritual mortification-which has been sought after or at least
accepted-to the passion of Jesus, who has obtained the forgiveness for him. They remind us that
even after absolution there remains in the Christian a dark area due to the wound of sin, to the
imperfection of love in repentance, to the weakening of the spiritual faculties. It is an area in which
there still operates an infectious source of sin which must always be fought with mortification and
penance. This is the meaning of the humble but sincere act of satisfaction.(189)
IV. There remains to be made a brief mention of other important convictions about the sacrament
of penance.
First of all, it must be emphasized that nothing is more personal and intimate that this sacrament,
in which the sinner stands alone before God with his sin, repentance and trust. No one can repent
in his place or ask forgiveness in his name. There is a certain solitude of the sinner in his sin, and
this can be seen dramatically represented in Cain with sin "crouching at his door," as the Book of
Genesis says so effectively, and with the distinctive mark on his forehead;(190) in David,
admonished by the prophet Nathan;(191) or in the prodigal son when he realizes the condition to
which he has reduced himself by staying away from his father and decides to return to him.(192)
Everything takes place between the individual alone and God. But at the same time one cannot
deny the social nature of this sacrament, in which the whole church-militant, suffering and glorious
in heaven- comes to the aid of the penitent and welcomes him again into her bosom, especially as
it was the whole church which had been offended and wounded by his sin. As the minister of
penance, the priest by virtue of his sacred office appears as the witness and representative of this
ecclesial nature of the sacrament. The individual nature and ecclesial nature are two
complementary aspects of the sacrament which the progressive reform of the Rite of Penance,
especially that contained in the Ordo Paenitentiae promulgated by Paul VI, has sought to
emphasize and to make more meaningful in its celebration.
V. Second, it must be emphasized that the most precious result of the forgiveness obtained in the
sacrament of penance consists in reconciliation with God, which takes place in the inmost heart of
45
the son who was lost and found again, which every penitent is. But it has to be added that this
reconciliation with God leads, as it were, to other reconciliations which repair the breaches caused
by sin. The forgiven penitent is reconciled with himself in his inmost being, where he regains his
own true identity. He is reconciled with his brethren whom he has in some way attacked and
wounded. He is reconciled with the church. He is reconciled with all creation.
As a result of an awareness of this, at the end of the celebration there arises in the penitent a
sense of gratitude to God for the gift of divine mercy received, and the church invites the penitent
to have this sense of gratitude.
Every confessional is a special and blessed place from which, with divisions wiped away, there is
born new and uncontaminated a reconciled individual-a reconciled world!
VI. Last, I particularly wish to speak of one final consideration, one which concerns all of us
priests, who are the ministers of the sacrament of penance.(193) The priest's celebration of the
eucharist and administration of the other sacraments, his pastoral zeal, his relationship with the
faithful his communion with his brother priests, his collaboration with his bishop, his life of prayer-in
a word, the whole of his priestly existence, suffers an inexorable decline if by negligence or for
some other reason he fails to receive the sacrament of penance at regular intervals and in a spirit
of genuine faith and devotion. If a priest were no longer to go to confession or properly confess his
sins, his priestly being and his priestly action would feel its effects very soon and this would also
be noticed by the community of which he was the pastor.
But I also add that even in order to be a good and effective minister of penance the priest needs to
have recourse to the source of grace and holiness present in this sacrament We priests, on the
basis of our personal experience, can certainly say that the more careful we are to receive the
sacrament of penance and to approach it frequently and with good dispositions, the better we fulfill
our own ministry as confessors and ensure that our penitents benefit from it. And on the other
hand, this ministry would lose much of its effectiveness if in some way we were to stop being good
penitents. Such is the internal logic of this great sacrament. It invites all of us priests of Christ to
pay renewed attention to our personal confession.
Personal experience in its turn becomes and must become today an incentive for the diligent,
regular, patient and fervent exercise of the sacred ministry of penance, to which we are committed
by the very fact of our priesthood and our vocation as pastors and servants of our brothers and
sisters. Also with this present exhortation I therefore address an earnest invitation to all the priests
of the world, especially to my brothers in the episcopacy and to pastors of souls, an invitation to
make every effort to encourage the faithful to make use of this sacrament. I urge them to use all
possible and suitable means to ensure that the greatest possible number of our brothers and
sisters receive the "grace that has been given to us" through penance for the reconciliation of
every soul and of the whole world with God in Christ.
46
Forms of Celebration
32. Following the suggestions of the Second Vatican Council, the Ordo Paenitentiae provided
three rites which, while always keeping intact the essential elements, make it possible to adapt the
celebration of the sacrament of penance to particular pastoral circumstances.
The first form-reconciliation of individual penitents is the only normal and ordinary way of
celebrating the sacrament, and it cannot and must not be allowed to fall into disuse or be
neglected. The second form-reconciliation of a number of penitents with individual confession and
absolution-even though in the preparatory acts it helps to give greater emphasis to the community
aspects of the sacrament, is the same as the first form in the culminating sacramental act, namely
individual confession and individual absolution of sins. It can thus be regarded as equal to the first
form as regards the normality of the rite. The third form however- reconciliation of a number of
penitents with general confession and absolution-is exceptional in character. It is therefore not left
to free choice but is regulated by a special discipline.
The first form makes possible a highlighting of the more personal- and essential-aspects which are
included in the penitential process. The dialogue between penitent and confessor, the sum of the
elements used (the biblical texts, the choice of the forms of "satisfaction," etc.), make the
sacramental celebration correspond more closely to the concrete situation of the penitent. The
value of these elements are perceived when one considers the different reasons that bring a
Christian to sacramental penance: a need for personal reconciliation and readmission to friendship
with God by regaining the grace lost by sin; a need to check one's spiritual progress and
sometimes a need for a more accurate discernment of one's vocation; on many other occasions a
need and a desire to escape from a state of spiritual apathy and religious crisis. Thanks then to its
individual character, the first form of celebration makes it possible to link the sacrament of
penance with something which is different but readily linked with it: I am referring to spiritual
direction. So it is certainly true that personal decision and commitment are clearly signified and
promoted in this first form.
The second form of celebration, precisely by its specific dimension, highlights certain aspects of
great importance: The word of God listened to in common ha s remarkable effect as compared to
its individual reading and better emphasizes the ecclesial character of conversion and
reconciliation. It is particularly meaningful at various seasons of the liturgical year and in
connection with events of special pastoral importance. The only point that needs mentioning here
is that for celebrating the second form there should be an adequate number of confessors present.
It is therefore natural that the criteria for deciding which of the two forms of celebration to use
should be dictated not by situational and subjective reasons, but by a desire to secure the true
spiritual good of the faithful in obedience to the penitential discipline of the church.
47
We shall also do well to recall that, for a balanced spiritual and pastoral orientation in this regard,
great importance must continue to be given to teaching the faithful also to make use of the
sacrament of penance for venial sins alone, as is borne out by a centuries-old doctrinal tradition
and practice.
Though the church knows and teaches that venial sins are forgiven in other ways too-for instance,
by acts of sorrow, works of charity, prayer, penitential rites-she does not cease to remind everyone
of the special usefulness of the sacramental moment for these sins too. The frequent use of the
sacrament-to which some categories of the faithful are in fact held-strengthens the awareness that
even minor sins offend God and harm the church, the body of Christ. Its celebration then becomes
for the faithful "the occasion and the incentive to conform themselves more closely to Christ and
tomake themselves more docile to the voice of the Spirit."(194) Above all it should be emphasized
that the grace proper to the sacramental celebration has a great remedial power and helps to
remove the very roots of sin.
Attention to the actual celebration,(195) with special reference to the importance of the word of
God which is read, recalled and explained, when this is possible and suitable, to the faithful and
with them, will help to give fresh life to the practice of the sacrament and prevent it from declining
into a mere formality and routine. The penitent will be helped rather to discover that he or she is
living a salvific event capable of inspiring fresh life and giving true peace of heart. This careful
attention to the celebration will also lead the individual churches to arrange special times for the
celebration of the sacrament. It will also be an incentive to teaching the faithful especially children
and young people, to accustom themselves to keeping to these times except in cases of
necessity, when the parish priest must always show a ready willingness to receive whoever comes
to him.
Celebration of the Sacrament with General Absolution
33. The new liturgical regulation and, more recently, the Code of Canon Law,196 specify the
conditions which make it lawful to use "the rite of reconciliation of a number of penitents with
general confession and absolution." The norms and regulations given on this point, which are the
result of mature and balanced consideration, must be accepted and applied in such a way as to
avoid any sort of arbitrary interpretation.
It is opportune to reflect more deeply on the reasons which order the celebration of penance in
one of the first two forms and permit the use of the third form. First of all, there is the reason of
fidelity to the will of the Lord Jesus, transmitted by the doctrine of the church, and also the reason
of obedience to the church's laws. The synod repeated in one of its propositions the unchanged
teaching which the church has derived from the most ancient tradition, and it repeated the law with
which she has codified the ancient penitential practice: The individual and integral confession of
sins with individual absolution constitutes the only ordinary way in which the faithful who are
48
conscious of serious sin are reconciled with God and with the church. From this confirmation of the
church's teaching it is clear that every serious sin must always be stated, with its determining
circumstances, in an individual confession.
Then there is a reason of the pastoral order. While it is true that, when the conditions required by
canonical discipline occur, use may be made of the third form of celebration, it must not be
forgotten that this form cannot become an ordinary one, and it cannot and must not be used-as the
synod repeated-except "in cases of grave necessity." And there remains unchanged the obligation
to make an individual confession of serious sins before again having recourse to another general
absolution. The bishop therefore, who is the only one competent in his own diocese to assess
whether the conditions actually exist which canon law lays down for the use of the third form, will
give this judgment with a grave obligation on his own conscience, with full respect for the law and
practice of the church and also taking into account the criteria and guidelines agreed upon- on the
basis of the doctrinal and pastoral considerations explained above-with the other members of the
episcopal conference. Equally it will always be a matter of genuine pastoral concern to lay down
and guarantee the conditions that make recourse to the third form capable of producing the
spiritual fruits for which it is meant. The exceptional use of the third form of celebration must never
lead to a lesser regard for, still less an abandonment of, the ordinary forms nor must it lead to this
form being considered an alternative to the other two forms. It is not in fact left to the freedom of
pastors and the faithful to choose from among these forms the one considered most suitable. It
remains the obligation of pastors to facilitate for the faithful the practice of integral and individual
confession of sins, which constitutes for them not only a duty but also an inviolable and inalienable
right, besides being something needed by the soul. For he faithful, the use of the third form of
celebration involves the obligation of following all the norms regulating its exercise, including that
of not having recourse again to general absolution before a normal integral and individual
confession of sins, which must be made as soon as possible. Before granting absolution the priest
must inform and instruct the faithful about this norm and about the obligation to observe it.
With this reminder of the doctrine and the law of the church I wish to instill into everyone the lively
sense of responsibility which must guide us when we deal with sacred things like the sacraments,
which are not our property, or like consciences, which have a right not to be left in uncertainty and
confusion. The sacraments and consciences, I repeat, are sacred, and both require that we serve
them in truth.
This is the reason for the church's law.
Some More Delicate Cases
34. I consider it my duty to mention at this point, if very briefly, a pastoral case that the synod dealt
with-insofar as it was able to do so-and which it also considered in one of the propositions. I am
referring to certain situations, not infrequent today, affecting Christians who wish to continue their
49
sacramental religious practice, but who are prevented from doing so by their personal condition,
which is not in harmony with the commitments freely undertaken before God and the church.
These are situations which seem particularly delicate and almost inextricable.
Numerous interventions during the synod, expressing the general thought of the fathers,
emphasized the coexistence and mutual influence of two equally important principles in relation to
these cases. The first principle is that of compassion and mercy, whereby the church, as the
continuer in history of Christ's presence and work, not wishing the death of the sinner but that the
sinner should be converted and live,(197) and careful not to break the bruised reed or to quench
the dimly burning wick,(198) ever seeks to offer, as far as possible, the path of return to God and
of reconciliation with him. The other principle is that of truth and consistency, whereby the church
does not agree to call good evil and evil good. Basing herself on these two complementary
principles, the church can only invite her children who find themselves in these painful situations to
approach the divine mercy by other ways, not however through the sacraments of penance and
the eucharist until such time as they have attained the required dispositions.
On this matter, which also deeply torments our pastoral hearts, it seemed my precise duty to say
clear words in the apostolic exhortation Familiaris Consortio, as regards the case of the divorced
and remarried,(199) and likewise the case of Christians living together in an irregular union.
At the same time and together with the synod, I feel that it is my clear duty to urge the ecclesial
communities and especially the bishops to provide all possible assistance to those priests who
have fallen short of the grave commitments which they undertook at their ordination and who are
living in irregular situations. None of these brothers of ours should feel abandoned by the church.
For all those who are not at the present moment in the objective conditions required by the
sacrament of penance, the church's manifestations of maternal kindness, the support of acts of
piety apart from sacramental ones, a sincere effort to maintain contact with the Lord, attendance at
Mass and the frequent repetition of acts of faith, hope, charity and sorrow made as perfectly as
possible can prepare the way for full reconciliation at the hour that providence alone knows.
CONCLUDING EXPRESSION OF HOPE
35. At the end of this document I hear echoing within me and I desire to repeat to all of you the
exhortation which the first bishop of Rome, at a critical hour of the beginning of the church,
addressed "to the exiles of the dispersion...chosen and destined by God the Father...: Have unity
of spirit, sympathy, love of the brethren, a tender heart and a humble mind."(200) The apostle
urged: "Have unity of spirit." But he immediately went on to point out the sins against harmony and
peace which must be avoided: "Do not return evil for evil or reviling for reviling; but on the contrary
bless, for to this you have been called, that you may obtain a blessing." And he ended with a word
of encouragement and hope: "Who is there to harm you if you are zealous for what is right?"(201)
50
At an hour of history which is no less critical, I dare to join my exhortation to that of the prince of
the apostles, the first to occupy this See of Rome as a witness to Christ and as pastor of the
church, and who here "presided in charity" before the entire world. In communion with the bishops
who are the successors of the apostles and supported by the collegial reflection that many of
them, meeting in the synod, devoted to the topics and problems of reconciliation, I too wish to
speak to you with the same spirit of the fisherman of Galilee when he said to our brothers and
sisters in the faith, distant in time but so closely linked in heart: "Have unity of spirit.... Do not
return evil for evil.... Be zealous for what is right."(202) And he added: "It is better to suffer for
doing right, if that should be God's will, than for doing wrong."(203)
This exhortation is completely permeated by words which Peter had heard from Jesus himself and
by ideas which formed part of his "good news": the new commandment of love of neighbor; the
yearning for and commitment to unity; the beatitudes of mercy and patience in persecution for the
sake of justice; the repaying of evil with good; the forgiveness of offenses; the love of enemies. In
these words and ideas is the original and transcendent synthesis of the Christian ethic or, more
accurately and more profoundly, of the spirituality of the new covenant in Jesus Christ.
I entrust to the Father, rich in mercy, I entrust to the Son of God, made man as our redeemer and
reconciler, I entrust to the Holy Spirit, source of unity and peace, this call of mine, as father and
pastor, to penance and reconciliation. May the most holy and adorable Trinity cause to spring up
in the church and in the world the small seed which at this hour I plant in the generous soil of
many human hearts.
In order that in the not too distant future abundant fruits may come from it, I invite you all to join me
in turning to Christ's heart, the eloquent sign of the divine mercy, the "propitiation for our sins," "our
peace and reconciliation,"(204) that we may draw from it an interior encouragement to hate sin
and to be converted to God, and find in it the divine kindness which lovingly responds to human
repentance.
I likewise invite you to turn with me to the immaculate heart of Mary, mother of Jesus, in whom "is
effected the reconciliation of God with humanity..., is accomplished the work of reconciliation,
because she has received from God the fullness of grace in virtue of the redemptive sacrifice of
Christ."(205) Truly Mary has been associated with God, by virtue of her divine motherhood, in the
work of reconciliation.(206)
Into the hands of this mother, whose fiat marked the beginning of that "fullness of time" in which
Christ accomplished the reconciliation of humanity with God, to her immaculate heart-to which we
have repeatedly entrusted the whole of humanity, disturbed by sin and tormented by so many
tensions and conflicts-I now in a special way entrust this intention: that through her intercession
humanity may discover and travel the path of penance, the only path that can lead it to full
reconciliation.
51
To all of you who in a spirit of ecclesial communion in obedience and faith(207) receive the
indications, suggestions and directives contained in this document and seek to put them into living
pastoral practice, I willingly impart my apostolic blessing.
Given in Rome at St. Peter's on December 2, the first Sunday of Advent, in the year 1984, the
seventh of my pontificate.
NOTES1. Mk 1:15.2. Cf Pope John Paul II, opening speech at the Third General Conference of the Latin American
Episcopate: AAS 71 (1979), 198-204.3. The idea of a "shattered world" is seen in the works of numerous contemporary
writers, both Christian and non-Christian, witnesses of man's condition in this tormented period of history.4. Cf Pastoral
Constitution on the Church in the Modern World Gaudium et Spes, 3, 43 and 44; Decree on the Ministry and Life of
Priests Presbyterorum Ordinis, 12; Pope Paul VI, encyclical Ecclesiam Suam: AAS 56 (1964), 609-659.5. At the very
beginning of the church, the apostle Paul wrote with words of fire about division in the body of the church, in the famous
passage 1 Cor 1:10-16. Years later, St. Clement of Rome was also to write to the Corinthians, to condemn the wounds
inside that community: cf Letter to the Corinthians, III-VI; LVII: Patres Apostolici, ed. Funk, I, 103-109;171-173. We know
that from the earliest fathers onward Christ's seamless robe, which the soldiers did not divide, became an image of the
church's unity: cf St. Cyprian, De EcclesiaeCatholicae Unitate, 7: CCL 3/1, 254f; St. Augustine, In Ioannis Evangelium
Tractatus, 118, 4: CCL 36, 656f; St. Bede theVenerable, In Marci Evangelium Expositio, IV, 15: CCL 120, 630i In Lucae
Evangelium Expositio, VI, 23: CCL 120, 403; In S. Ioannis Evangelium Expositio, 19: PL 92, 911f.6. The encyclical
Pacem in Terris, John XXIII's spiritual testament, is often considered a "social document" and even a "political message,"
and in fact it is if these terms are understood in their broadest sense. As is evident more than twenty years after its
publication, the document is in fact more than a strategy for the peaceful coexistence of people and nations; it is a
pressing reminder of the higher values without which peace on earth becomes a mere dream. One of these values is
precisely that of reconciliation among people, and John XXIII often referred to this subject. With regard to Paul VI, it will
sufflce to recall that in calling the church and the world to celebrate the Holy Year of 1975, he wished "renewal and
reconciliation" to be the central idea of that important event. Nor can one forget the catechesis which he devoted to this
key theme, also in explaining the jubilee itself.7. As I wrote in the bull of indiction of the Jubilee Year of the Redemption:
"This special time, when all Christians are called upon to realize more profoundly their vocation to reconciliation with the
Father in the Son, will only reach its full achievement if it leads to a fresh commitment by each and every person to the
service of reconciliation, not only among all the disciples of Christ but also among all men and women": bull Aperite
Portas Redemptori, 3: AAS 75 (1983), 93.8. The theme of the synod was, more precisely, "Reconciliation and Penance in
the Mission of the Church."9. Cf Mt 4:17; Mk 1:15.10. Cf Lk 3:8.11. Cf Mt 16:24-26; Mk 8:34-36; Lk 9:23-25.12. Eph
4:23f.13. Cf 1 Cor 3:1-20.14. Cf Col 3:1f.15. "We beseech you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God": 2 Cor 5:20.16.
"We also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received our reconciliation": Rom
5:11; cf Col 1:20.17. The Second Vatican Council noted: "The dichotomy affecting the modern world is, in fact, a
symptom of the deeper dichotomy that is in man himself. He is the meeting point of many conflicting forces. In his
condition as a created being he is subject to a thousand shortcomings, but feels untrammeled in his inclinations and
destined for a higher form of life. Torn by a welter of anxieties he is compelled to choose between them and repudiate
some among them. Worse still, feeble and sinful as he is, he often does the very thing he hates and does not do what he
wants (cf Rom 7:14ff). And so he feels himself divided, and the result is a host of discords in social life." Gaudium et
52
Spes, 10.18. Cf Col 1:19f.19. Cf Pope John Paul II, encyclical Dives in Misencordia, 5-6: AAS 72 (1980), 1193-1199.20.
Cf Lk 15:11-32.21. In the Old Testament, the Book of Jonah is a wonderful anticipation and figure of this aspect of the
parable. Jonah's sin is that he was "displeased...exceedingly and he was angry" because God is "a gracious God and
merciful, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love, and repentest of evil. His sin is also that of pitying a castor oil
plant "which came into being in a night and perished in a night" and not understanding that the Lord pities Niniveh. cf Jon
4.22. Cf Rom 5:10f.; cf Col 1:20-22.23. Cf 2 Cor 5:18, 20.24. Jn 11:52.25. Cf Col 1:20.26. Cf Sir 44:17.27. Eph 2:14.28.
Eucharistic Prayer 3.29. Cf Mt 5:23f.30. Ibid., 27:46; Mk 15:34, Ps 22(21):2.31. Cf Eph 2:14-16.32. St. Leo the Great,
Tractatus 63 (De Passione Domini, 12), 6: CCL 138/A, 386.33. Cf 2 Cor 5:18f.34. Dogmatic Constitution on the Church
Lumen Gentium, 1.35. "The church is also by her nature always reconciling, handing on to others the gift that she herself
has received, the gift of having been forgiven and made one with God": Pope John Paul II, Homily at Liverpool, May 30,
1982: Insegnamenti, V, 2 (1982), 1992.36. Cf Acts 15:2-33.37. Cf Apostolic exhortation Evangelii Nuntiandi, 13: AAS 68
(1976), 12f.38. Cf Pope John Paul II, apostolic exhortation Catechesi Tradendae, 24: AAS 71 (1979), 1297.39. Cf Pope
Paul VI, encyclical, Ecclesiam Suam: ASS 56 (1964), 609-659.40. Cf 2 Cor 5:20.41. Cf 1 Jn 4:8.42. Cf Wis 11:23-26; Gn
1:27; Ps 8:4-8.43. Cf Wis 2:24.44. Cf Gn 3:12f; 4:1-16.45. Cf Eph 2:4.46. Cf ibid., 1:10.47. Jn 13:34.48. Cf Second
Vatican Council Pastoral Constitution on the Church in the Modern World Gaudium et Spes, 38.49. Cf Mk 1:15.50. Cf 2
Cor 5:20.51. Cf Eph 2:14-16.52. Cf St. Augustine, De Civitate Dei, XXII 17: CCL 48, 835f; St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa
Theologiae, III pars, q. 64, art. 2 ad tertium.53. Cf Pope Paul VI, Allocution at the Closing of the Third Session of the
Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, November 21, 1964: ASS 56 (1964), 1015-1018.54. Second Vatican Council,
Dogmatic Constitution on the Church Lumen Gentium, 39.55.Ibid., Decree on Ecumenism Unitatis Redintegratio, 4.56.1
Jn 1:8-9.57. 1 Jn 3:20; cf my reference to this passage in my address at the general audience of March 14, 1984:
Insegnamenti, VII, 1 (1984) 683.58. Cf 2 Sm 11-12.59. Cf Ps 50(51):3-4.60. Cf Lk 15:18, 21.61. Lettere, Florence 1970, I,
pp.3f; II Dialogo della Divina Providenza, Rome 1980, passim.62. Cf Rom 3:23-26.63. Cf Eph 1:18.64. Cf Gn 11:1-9.65.
Cf Ps 127 (126):1.66. Cf 2 1 hes 2:7.67. Cf Rom 7:7-25; Eph 2:2; 6:12.68. The terminology used in the Septuagint Greek
translation and in the New Testament for sin is significant. The most common term for sin is hamartia, with its various
derivatives. It expresses the concept of offending more or less gravely against a norm or law, or against a person or even
a divinity. But sin is also called adikia, and the concept here is of acting unjustly. The Bible also speaks of parabasis
(transgression), asebeis (impiety) and other concepts. They all convey the image of sin.69. Gn 3:5: "And you will be like
God, knowing good and evil"; cf also v. 22.70. Cf ibid., 3:12.71. Cf ibid., 4:2-16.72. The expression from the French writer
Elizabeth Leseur, Journal et Pensees de Chaque Jour, Paris 1918, p. 31.73. Cf Mt 22:39; Mk 12:31; Lk 10:27f.74. Cf
Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith: Instruction on Certain Aspects of the Theology of Liberation Libertatis
Nuntius; August 6, 1984 IV, 14-15: ASS 76 (1984), 885f.75. Cf Nm 15:30.76. Cf Lv 18:26-30.77. Cf ibid., 19:4.78. Cf ibid.,
20:1-7.79. Cf Ex 21:17.80. Cf Lv 4:2ff; 5:1ff; Nm 15:22-29.81. Cf Mt 5:28; 6:23; 12:31f; 15:19; Mk 3:28-30; Rom 1:29-31;
13:13; Jas 4.82. Cf Mt 5:17; 15:1-10; Mk 10:19; Lk 18:20.83. Cf 1 Jn 5:16f.84. Cf 1 Jn 17:3.85. Cf 1 Jn 2:22.86. Cf 1 Jn
5:21.87. Cf 1 Jn 5:16-21.88. Cf Mt 12:31f.89. Cf St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae II-II, q. 14, aa. 1-8.90. Cf 1 Jn
3:20.91. St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, II-II, q. 14, a. 3, ad primum.92. Cf Phil 2:12.93. Cf St. Augustine, De
Spintu et Littera, XXVIII: CSEL 60, 202f; Enarrat. in ps. 39, 22: CCL 38, 441; Enchiridion ad Laurentium de Fide et Spe et
Cantate, XIX, 71: CCL 46, 88; In Ioannis Evangelium Tractatus, 12, 3,14: CCL 36, 129.94. St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa
Theologiae, I-II, q. 72, a. 5.95. Cf Council of Trent, Session VI, De Iustificatione, Chap. 2 and Canons 23, 25, 27:
Conciliorum Oecumenicorum Decreta, Bologna 1973, 671 and 680f (DS 1573, 1575,1577).96. Cf Council of Trent,
Session IV De Iustificatione, Chapt. 15: Conciliorum Oecumenicorum Decreta, ed. dt. 677 (DS 1544).97. Pope John Paul
II, Angelus Message of March 14, 1982: Insegnamenti V, 1 (1982),861.98. Gaudium et Spes, 16.99. Pope John Paul II,
53
Angelus Message of March 14, 1982: Insegnamenti V, 1 (1982),860.100. Pope Pius XII, Radio Message to the U.S.
National Catechetical Congress in Boston (October 26,1946): Discorsi e Radiomessaggi VIII (1946) 288.101. Cf Pope
John Paul II, encyclical Redemptor Hominis, 15: AAS 71 (1979), 286-289.102. Cf Gaudium et Spes, 3; cf 1 Jn 3:9.103.
Pope John Paul II, Address to the Bishops of the Eastern Region of France (April 1,1982),2: Insegnamenti V, 1 (1982),
1081.104.1 Tm 3:15f.105. The text presents a certain difficulty, since the relative pronoun which opens the literal
translation does not agree with the neuter mysterion. Some late manuscripts have adjusted the text in order to correct the
grammar. But it was Paul's intention merely to put next to what he had written a venerable text which for him was fully
explanatory.106. The early Christian community expresses its faith in the crucified and glorified Christ, whom the angels
adore and who is the Lord. But the striking element of this message remains the phrase"manifested in the flesh": that the
eternal Son of God became man is the "great mystery.107. 1 Jn 5:18f.108. Ibid., 3:9.109. 1 Tm 3:15.110. 1 Jn 1:8.111.
Ibid., 5:19.112. Cf Ps. 51(50):5.113. Cf Eph. 2:4.114 Cf Pope John Paul II, Dives in Misericordia, 8; 15: AAS 72 (1980),
1203-1207; 1231.115. 2 Sm 12:13.116. Ps 51(50):3.117. Ibid., 51(50):7.118. 2 Sm 12:13.119. Cf 2 Cor 5:18.120. Cf 2
Cor 5:19.121. Gaudium et Spes, 92.122. Decree on the Pastoral Offlce of Bishops in the Church Christus Dominus, 13;
cf Declaration on Christian Education Gravissimum Educationis, 8; Decree on the Church's Missionary Activity Ad
Gentes, 11-12.123. Cf Pope Paul VI, Ecclesiam Suam, III: AAS 56 (1964), 639-659.124. Lumen Gentium, 1, 9,13.125.
Pope Paul VI, apostolic exhortation Paterna Cum Benevolentia: AAS 67 (1975), 5-23.126. Cf Unitatis Redintegratio, 7-
8.127. Ibid., 4.128. St. Augustine, Sermo 96, 7: PL 38, 588.129. Pope John Paul II, Speech to Members of the Diplomatic
Corps Accredited to the Holy See January 15, 1983), 4, 6, 1 1: AAS 75 (1983), 376, 378f, 381.130. Pope John Paul II,
Homily at the Mass for the 16th World Day of Peace (January 1, 1983), 6: Insegnamenti VI, 1 (1983), 7.131. Pope Paul
VI, apostolic exhortation Evangelii Nuntiandi, 70: AAS 68 (1976), 59f.132. 1 Tm 3:15.133. Cf Mt 5:23f.134. Cf ibid., 5:38-
40.135. Cf ibid., 6:12.136. Cf ibid., 5:43ff.137. Cf ibid., 18:21f.138. Cf Mk 1:14; Mt 3:2; 4:17; Lk 3:8.139. Cf Lk 15:17.140.
Ibid., 17:3f.141. Cf Mt 3:2; Mk 1:2-6; Lk 3:1-6.142. Cf Gaudium et Spes, 8, 16, 19, 26, 41,48.143. Cf Declaration on
Religious Liberty Dignitatis Humanae, 2, 3, 4.144. Cf among many others the addresses at the general audiences of
March 28,1973: Insegnamenti XI (1973),294ff; August 8,1973: ibid., 772ff, November 7, 1973: ibid., 1054ff; March 13,
1974: Insegnamenti' XII (1974), 230ff; May 8, 1974: ibid., 402ff; February 12, 1975: Insegnamenti XIII (1975), ibid.,290ff;
July 13, 1977: Insegnamenti XV (1977), 710ff.145. Cf PopeJohn Paul II, Angelus Message of March 14, 1982:
Insegnamenti V, 1 (1982), 860f.146. Cf Pope John Paul II, General Audience Address of August 17, 1983, 1-3:
Insegnamenti VI, 2 (1983), 256f.147. Heb 4:15.148. Cf Mt 4:1-11; Mk 1:12f; Lk 4:1-13.149. Cf 1 Cor 10:13.150. Cf Mt
6:13; Lk 11:4.151. 1 Pt 3:21.152. Cf Rom 6:3f; Col 2:12.153. Cf Mt 3:11; Lk 3:16; Jn 1:33; Acts 1:5; 11:16.154. Cf Mt
3:15.155. St. Augustine, In Ioannis Evangelium Tractatus, 26, 13: CCL 36, 266.156. Sacred Congregation of Rites,
Instruction on the Worship of the Eucharistic Mystery Eucharisticum Mysterium (May 25, 1967) 35 AAS 59 (1967),
560f.157. Ps 78(77):38f.158. Cf Jn 1:29; Is 53:7-12.159. Cf Jn 5:27.160. Cf Mt 9:2-7; Lk 5.-18-25; 7:47-49; Mk 2:3-
12.161. Cf Jn 3:17.162. Jn 20:22; Mt 18:18; cf also, as regards Peter, Mt 16:19. Blessed Isaac of Stella in one of his talks
emphasizes the full communion of Christ with the church in the forgiveness of sins: "The church can forgive nothing
without Christ and Christ does not wish to forgive anything without the church. The church can forgive nothing except to a
penitent, that is to say, to a person whom Christ has touched with his grace: Christ does not wish to consider anything
forgiven in a person who despises the church": Sermo 11 (In Dominica II Post Epiphaniam, 1): PL 194, 1729.163. Cf Mt
12:49f; Mk 3:33f; Lk 8:20f; Rom 8:29: "the firstborn among many brethren."164. Cf Heb 2:17; 4:15.165. Cf Mt 18:12f; Lk
15:4-6.166. Cf Lk 5:31f.167. Cf Mt 22:16.168. Cf Acts 10:42.169. Cf Jn 8:16.170. Cf the address to the penitentiaries of
the Roman patriarchal basilicas and to the priest confessors at the closing of the Jubilee of the Redemption auly 9,
1984): L'Osservatore Romano, July 9-10, 1984.171. Jn 8:11.172. Cf Ti 3:4.173. Cf Council of Trent, Session XIV De
54
Sacramento Poenitentiae, Chap. 1 and Canon 1: Conciliorum Oecumenicorum Decreta, 703f, 711 (DS 1668-
1670,1701).174. Lumen Gentium, 11.175. Cf Council of Trent, Session XIV, De Sacramento Poenitentiae, Chap. l and
Canon 1: Conciliorum Oecumenicorum Decreta, ed. cit.,703f,711 (DS 1668-1670, 1701).176. Cf Constitution on the
Sacred Liturgy Suaosanctum Concilium, 72.177. Cf Rituale Romanum ex Decreto Sacrosancti Conalii Oecumenici
Vaticani II Instauratum, Auctoritate Pauli Vl Promulgatum: Ordo Paenitenttae, Vatican Polyglot Press, 1974.178. The
Council of Trent uses the attenuated expression "ad instar actus iudicialis" (Session XIV De Sacramento Poenitentiae,
Chap. 6: ConciliorumOecumenicorum Decreta, ed. dt., 707 (DS 1685), in order to emphasize the difference from human
tribunals. The new Rite of Penance makes reference to this function, Nos. 6b and 10a.179. Cf Lk 5:31f: "Those who are
well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick" concluding: "I have...come to call...sinners to repentance"; Lk
9:2: "And he sent them out to preach the kingdom of God and to heal." The image of Christ the physician takes on new
and striking elements if we compare it with the figure of the Servant of Yahweh, of whom the Book of Isaiah prophesies
that "he has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows" and that with his stripes we are healed" (Is 53:4f).180. St.
Augustine, Sermo 82, 8: PL 38, 511.181. Ibid., Sermo, 352, 3, 8:9: PL 39, 1558f.182. Cf Ordo Paenitentiae, 6c.183. Even
the pagans recognized the existence of "divine" moral laws which have "always" existed and which are written in the
depths of the human heart, cf Sophocles (Antigone, w. 450-460) ant Aristotle (Rhetor., Book I, Chap.15, 1375 a-b).184.
On the role of conscience cf what I said at the general audience of March 14, 1984, 3: Insegnamenti VII, 1 (1984),
683.185. Cf Council of Trent, Session XIV De Sacramento Poenitentiae, Chap.4 De Contritione: Conciliorum
Oecumenicorum Decreta, ed. cit., 705 (DS 1676-1677). Of course, in order to approach the sacrament of penance it is
sufficient to have attrition, or imperfect repentance, due more to fear than to love. But in the sphere of the sacrament, the
penitent, under the action of the grace that he receives, "ex attrito fit conmtus," since penance really operates in the
person who is welldisposed to conversion in love: cf Council of Trent, ibid., ed. cit., 705 (DS 1678).186. Ordo
Paenitentiae, 6c.187. Cf Ps 51(50):12.188. I had occasion to speak of these fundamental aspects of penance at the
general audiences of May 19, 1982: Insegnamenti V, 2 (1982), 1758ff; February 28, 1979: Insegnamenti II (1979), 475-
478; March 21, 1984: Insegnamenti VII, 1 (1984) 720-722. See also the norms of the Code of Canon Law concerning the
place for administering the sacrament and concerning confessionals (Canon 964, 2-3)189. I dealt with this subject
concisely at the general audience of March 7, 1984: Insegnamenti VII, 1 (1984), 631-633.190. Cf Gn 4:7, 15.191. Cf 2
Sm 12.192. Cf Lk 15:17-21.193. Cf Presbyterorum Ordinis, 18.194. Ordo Paenitentiae, 7b.195. Cf ibid., 17.196. Canons
961-963.197. Cf Ez 18:23.198. Cf Is 42:3; Mt 12:20.199. Cf Familiaris Consortio, 84: AAS 74 (1982), 184-186.200. Cf 1
Pt 1:1f; 3:8.201. Ibid., 3:9, 13.202. Ibid., 3:8, 9, 13.203. Ibid., 3:17.204. Litany of the Sacred Heart, cf 1 Jn 2:2; Eph 2:14;
Rom 3:25; 5:11.205. Pope John Paul II, General Audience Address of December 7, 1983, No. 2: Insegnamenti, VI, 2
(1983), 1264.206. Ibid., General Audience Address of January 4, 1984:Insegnamenti, VII, 1 (1984), 16-18.207. Cf Rom
1:5; 16:26.
 Copyright 1984 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 Copyright - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
55
