Rejoicing in the faith received and praising Christ for this immense gift, the Church in America
has recently celebrated the fifth centenary of the first preaching of the Gospel on its soil. The
commemoration made all American Catholics more deeply aware of Christ's desire to meet the
inhabitants of the so-called New World so that, gathering them into his Church, he might be
present in the continent's history. The evangelization of America is not only a gift from the Lord; it
is also a source of new responsibilities. Thanks to the work of those who preached the Gospel
through the length and breadth of the continent, countless sons and daughters have been
generated by the Church and the Holy Spirit. Now, no less than in the past, the words of the
Apostle echo in their hearts: “If I preach the Gospel, I have no reason to boast. It is my duty: woe
to me if I do not preach the Gospel!”. This duty is founded on the Risen Lord's
command to the Apostles before he ascended into heaven: “Preach the Gospel to all creation”.
This command applies to the whole Church; and, in this moment of her history, the Church in
America is called to take it up and respond with loving generosity to the fundamental task of
evangelization. This was what my Predecessor Paul VI, the first Pope to visit America, stressed at
Bogotà: “It will be our task, [Lord Jesus], as your representatives and stewards of your divine
mysteries, to spread among men the treasures of your word, your grace,
your example”. For the disciple of Christ the duty to evangelize is an obligation of love. “The
love of Christ impels us”, declares the Apostle Paul, recalling all that the Son of God
did for us in his redeeming sacrifice: “One man has died for all... that those who live may live no
longer for themselves, but for him who died and was raised for their sake”.
The celebration of anniversaries which evoke in a particular way Christ's love for us stirs in our
soul not only a sense of gratitude but also a sense of the need to “proclaim the wonders of God”,
to evangelize. Thus, the recent celebration of the five hundredth anniversary of the coming of the
Gospel to America — the moment, that is, when Christ first called America to faith — and the
approaching Jubilee, when the Church will celebrate the two thousandth anniversary of the
Incarnation of the Son of God, are special times when our hearts spontaneously ring out in
gratitude to the Lord. Realizing the greatness of the gifts received, the pilgrim Church in America
wishes to bring the whole of society and every man and woman to share in the riches of faith and
communion in Christ.
How the Synod Assembly came about
On October 12, 1992, the very day marking the five hundredth anniversary of the first
evangelization of America, I spoke at the opening of the Fourth General Assembly of the Latin
American Bishops in Santo Domingo. With the aim of broadening perspectives and giving impetus
to the new evangelization, I proposed a synodal meeting, “with a view to increased cooperation
between the different particular Churches”, so that together we might address, as part of the new
evangelization and as an expression of episcopal communion, “the problems relating to justice
and solidarity among all the nations of America”. The positive response to my suggestion from
the Bishops' Conferences of America enabled me to propose in my Apostolic Letter Tertio
Millennio Adveniente a synodal meeting “on the problems of the new evangelization in both parts
of the same continent, so different in origin and history, and on issues of justice and of
international economic relations, in view of the enormous gap between North and South”. This
paved the way for more immediate preparations, leading to the Special Assembly for America of
the Synod of Bishops, which was held in the Vatican from November 16 to December 12, 1997.
The theme of the Assembly
In keeping with the original idea, and after listening to the suggestions of the Pre-Synodal
Council, which expressed the views of many Pastors of the People of God on the American
continent, I announced the theme of the Special Assembly for America of the Synod in these
words: Encounter with the Living Jesus Christ: The Way to Conversion, Communion and Solidarity
in America. Put this way, the theme makes clear the centrality of the person of the Risen Christ,
present in the life of the Church and calling people to conversion, communion and solidarity. The
starting-point of such a program of evangelization is in fact the encounter with the Lord. Given by
Christ in the Paschal Mystery, the Holy Spirit guides us towards those pastoral goals which the
Church in America must attain in the third Christian millennium.
The celebration of the Assembly as an experience of encounter
It is certain that the Assembly was an experience of encounter with the Lord. I have especially
happy memories of the two Solemn Concelebrations at which I presided in Saint Peter's Basilica at
the opening and closing of the Assembly proceedings. Contact with the Risen Lord, truly, really
and substantially present in the Eucharist, generated the spiritual atmosphere which enabled the
Bishops taking part in the Synodal Assembly to see themselves not only as brothers in the Lord
but also as members of the College of Bishops, eager to follow in the footsteps of the Good
Shepherd under the leadership of the Successor of Peter, and serving the Church as she makes
her pilgrim way in every corner of the continent. None could fail to see the joy of the participants,
as they found the Assembly an extraordinary moment of encounter with the Lord, with the Vicar of
Christ, with so many Bishops, priests, religious and lay people from every part of the continent.
To be sure, a number of earlier events contributed in a preliminary but powerful way to creating an
atmosphere of fraternal encounter in the Synodal Assembly. First, there were the prior
experiences of communion in the General Assemblies of the Bishops of Latin America in Rio de
Janeiro, Medellin, Puebla  and Santo Domingo. These were moments
when the Pastors of the Church in Latin America were able to reflect together as brothers on the
most urgent pastoral questions affecting that part of the continent. There are also the periodic panAmerican meetings of Bishops, in which the participants can address issues affecting the entire
continent, and exchange views on the common problems and challenges facing the Church in the
countries of America.
Contributing to the unity of the continent
In Santo Domingo, when I first proposed a Special Assembly of the Synod, I remarked that “on
the threshold of the third Christian millennium and at a time when many walls and ideological
barriers have fallen, the Church feels absolutely duty-bound to bring into still deeper spiritual union
the peoples who compose this great continent and also, prompted by the religious mission which
is proper to the Church, to stir among these peoples a spirit of solidarity”. I asked that the
Special Assembly of the Synod of Bishops reflect on America as a single entity, by reason of all
that is common to the peoples of the continent, including their shared Christian identity and their
genuine attempt to strengthen the bonds of solidarity and communion between the different forms
of the continent's rich cultural heritage. The decision to speak of “America” in the singular was an
attempt to express not only the unity which in some way already exists, but also to point to that
closer bond which the peoples of the continent seek and which the Church wishes to foster as part
of her own mission, as she works to promote the communion of all in the Lord.
In the context of the new evangelization
With an eye to the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, I was keen that there should be a Special
Assembly of the Synod of Bishops for each of the five continents: after the Assembly for Africa, America, Asia  and most recently Oceania, in 1999 there will be, with
the Lord's help, a Special Assembly for Europe. This will make possible an Ordinary General
Assembly during the Jubilee year, to identify the rich insights which have come from the
continental Assemblies and synthesize the conclusions to be drawn from them. That will be
possible because similar concerns and points of interest have emerged from all the Synods. In this
regard, referring to this series of Synodal Assemblies, I noted how “the theme underlying them all
is evangelization, or rather the new evangelization, the foundations of which were laid down in the
Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Nuntiandi of Pope Paul VI”. And so, in both my initial proposal
to hold this Special Assembly of the Synod, and later in announcing the Synod itself, and after the
Bishops' Conferences of America had agreed to the idea, I suggested that the Assembly's
deliberations should address “the area of the new evangelization”, and the problems emerging
from it.
This concern was all the more prominent, given that I myself had outlined an initial program for a
new evangelization on American soil. As the Church throughout America prepared to
commemorate the five hundredth anniversary of the first evangelization of the continent, when
speaking to the Council of Latin American Bishops in Port-au-Prince (Haiti), I had said: “The
commemoration of the five hundred years of evangelization will achieve its full meaning if it
becomes a commitment by you the Bishops, together with your priests and people, a commitment
not to a re-evangelization but to a new evangelization — new in ardor, methods and
expression”. Later, I invited the whole Church to respond to this call, although the program of
evangelization, embracing today's world in all its diversity, must take different shape in the light of
two quite different situations: on the one hand, the situation of countries strongly affected by
secularization, and, on the other, the situation of countries where there are still “many vital
traditions of piety and popular forms of Christian religiosity”. There is no doubt that in varying
degrees both these situations are present in different countries or, better perhaps, in different
groups within the various countries of the American continent.
With the presence and help of the Lord
With the command to evangelize which the Risen Lord left to his Church there goes the
certitude, founded on his promise, that he continues to live and work among us: “I am with you
always, to the close of the age”. The mysterious presence of Christ in his Church is the
sure guarantee that the Church will succeed in accomplishing the task entrusted to her. At the
same time, this presence enables us to encounter him, as the Son sent by the Father, as the Lord
of Life who gives us his Spirit. A fresh encounter with Jesus Christ will make all the members of
the Church in America aware that they are called to continue the Redeemer's mission in their
lands.
If it is genuine, the personal encounter with the Lord will also bring a renewal of the Church: as
sisters and neighbors to each other, the particular Churches of the continent will strengthen the
bonds of cooperation and solidarity in order that the saving work of Christ may continue in the
history of America with ever greater effect. Open to the unity which comes from true communion
with the Risen Lord, the particular Churches, and all who belong to them, will discover through
their own spiritual experience that “the encounter with the living Jesus Christ” is “the path to
conversion, communion and solidarity”. To the extent that these goals are reached, there will
emerge an ever increasing dedication to the new evangelization of America.
THE ENCOUNTER WITH
THE LIVING JESUS CHRIST
“We have found the Messiah”
Encounters with the Lord in the New Testament
The Gospels relate many meetings between Jesus and the men and women of his day. A
common feature of all these narratives is the transforming power present and manifest in these
encounters with Jesus, inasmuch as they “initiate an authentic process of conversion, communion
and solidarity”  Among the most significant is the meeting with the Samaritan woman. Jesus calls her in order to quench his thirst, a thirst which was not only physical: indeed,
“he who asked for a drink was thirsting for the faith of that woman”. By saying to her “Give me
a drink”  and speaking to her about living water, the Lord awakened in the Samaritan
woman a question, almost a prayer for something far greater than she was capable of
understanding at the time: “Sir, give me this water, that I may not thirst”. The Samaritan
woman, even though “she does not yet understand”, is in fact asking for the living water of
which her divine visitor speaks. When Jesus reveals to her that he is indeed the Christ, the Samaritan woman feels impelled to proclaim to the other townspeople that she has
found the Messiah. Similarly, the most precious fruit of the encounter between
Jesus and Zacchaeus  is the conversion of the tax collector, who becomes aware
of his past unjust actions and decides to make abundant restitution — “four times as much” — to
those he had cheated. Furthermore, he adopts an attitude of detachment from material goods and
of charity towards the needy, which leads him to give half of his possessions to the poor.
Special mention should be made of the encounters with the Risen Jesus reported in the New
Testament. Mary Magdalen meets the Risen One, and as a result overcomes her discouragement
and grief at the death of the Master. In his new Paschal glory, Jesus tells her to
proclaim to the disciples that he has risen: “Go to my brethren”. For this reason, Mary
Magdalen could be called “the apostle of the Apostles”. The disciples of Emmaus, for their
part, after meeting and recognizing the Risen Lord, return to Jerusalem to recount to the Apostles
and the other disciples all that had happened to them. Jesus, “beginning with
Moses and all the prophets, interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself”. Later they would recognize that their hearts were burning within them as the Lord
talked to them along the road and opened the Scriptures to them. There is no doubt
that Saint Luke, in relating this episode, especially the decisive moment in which the two disciples
recognize Jesus, makes explicit allusion to the accounts of the institution of the Eucharist by Jesus
at the Last Supper. The Evangelist, in relating what the disciples of Emmaus told the
Eleven, uses an expression which had a precise Eucharistic meaning for the early Church: “He
was made known to them in the breaking of the bread”.
One of the encounters with the Risen Lord which had a decisive influence on the history of
Christianity was certainly the conversion of Saul, the future Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles, on
the road to Damascus. There his life was radically changed: from being a persecutor, he became
an Apostle. Paul himself describes this extraordinary
experience as a revelation of the Son of God “in order that I might preach him among the Gentiles”.
The Lord always respects the freedom of those he calls. There are cases where people, in
encountering Jesus, close their hearts to the change of life to which the Lord is calling them. Many
people in Jesus's own time saw and heard him, and yet did not open their hearts to his word. Saint
John's Gospel points to sin as the reason which prevents human beings from opening themselves
to the light which is Christ: “the light has come into the world, and people loved darkness rather
than light, because their deeds were evil”. The Gospels teach that attachment to wealth
is an obstacle to accepting Christ's call to follow him fully and without reserve. Here, the attitude of
the rich young man is indicative.
Personal encounters and community encounters
Some of the encounters with Jesus mentioned in the Gospel are clearly personal, as, for
example, when he summons someone to follow him. In these
cases, Jesus deals familiarly with his hearers: “'Rabbi (which means teacher), where are you
staying?'... 'Come and see'”. But at other times the encounters are communal in
nature. This is especially true of the encounters with the Apostles, which are of fundamental
importance for the constitution of the Church. Indeed, the Apostles, chosen by Jesus from among
the wider circle of his disciples, receive special training and enjoy a
closer relationship with him. To the crowds Jesus speaks in parables, while explaining to the
Twelve: “To you it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it has
not been given”. They are called to be heralds of the Good News and to carry out a
special mission of building up the Church by the grace of the sacraments. To this end, they
receive the necessary power: Jesus confers upon them the authority to forgive sins, invoking the
same authority which the Father has given him in heaven and on earth. They would
be the first to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, a gift then bestowed upon all who
by virtue of the Sacraments of Initiation would become part of the Christian community.
Encountering Christ in the time of the Church
The Church is the place where men and women, by encountering Jesus, can come to know
the love of the Father, for whoever has seen Jesus has seen the Father. After his
Ascension into heaven, Jesus acts through the powerful agency of the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, who transforms believers by giving them new life. Thus they become capable of
loving with God's own love, which “has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit which
has been given to us”. God's grace also enables Christians to work for the
transformation of the world, in order to bring about a new civilization, which my Predecessor Paul
VI appropriately called “the civilization of love”.
Indeed, “the Word of God, by taking on our human nature in all things save sin,
manifests the Father's plan by revealing to each human person the way to realize fully his or her
vocation. Thus Jesus not only reconciles man with the Father, but also reconciles man with
himself and thus reveals his true nature”. With these words the Synod Fathers, taking up the
teaching of the Second Vatican Council, reaffirmed that Jesus is the way which leads to full
personal realization, culminating in the definitive and eternal encounter with God. “I am the way,
and the truth, and the life; no one comes to the Father, but by me”. God has predestined
us “to be conformed to the image of his Son, in order that he might be the first-born of many
brethren”. Jesus Christ is thus the definitive answer to the question of the meaning of
life, and to those fundamental questions which still trouble so many men and women on the
American continent.
We encounter Jesus through Mary
At the birth of Jesus, the Magi came from the East to Bethlehem and “saw the child with Mary
his Mother”. At the beginning of his public life, at the marriage of Cana, when the Son of
God works the first of his signs, awakening faith in the disciples, it is Mary who
intervenes and directs the servants towards her Son in these words: “Do whatever he tells you”. In this regard I once wrote that “the Mother of Christ presents herself as the
spokeswoman of her Son's will, pointing out those things which must be done so that the salvific
power of the Messiah may be manifested”. For this reason Mary is the sure path to our
meeting with Christ. Devotion to the Mother of the Lord, when it is genuine, is always an impetus
to a life guided by the spirit and values of the Gospel.
How can we fail to emphasize the role which belongs to the Virgin Mary in relation to the pilgrim
Church in America journeying towards its encounter with the Lord? Indeed, the Most Blessed
Virgin “is linked in a special way to the birth of the Church in the history... of the peoples of
America; through Mary they came to encounter the Lord”.
Throughout the continent, from the time of the first evangelization, the presence of the Mother of
God has been strongly felt, thanks to the efforts of the missionaries. In their preaching, “the
Gospel was proclaimed by presenting the Virgin Mary as its highest realization. From the
beginning — invoked as Our Lady of Guadalupe — Mary, by her motherly and merciful figure, was
a great sign of the closeness of the Father and of Jesus Christ, with whom she invites us to enter
into communion”.
The appearance of Mary to the native Juan Diego on the hill of Tepeyac in 1531 had a decisive
effect on evangelization. Its influence greatly overflows the boundaries of Mexico, spreading to
the whole Continent. America, which historically has been, and still is, a melting-pot of peoples,
has recognized in the mestiza face of the Virgin of Tepeyac, “in Blessed Mary of Guadalupe, an
impressive example of a perfectly inculturated evangelization”. Consequently, not only in
Central and South America, but in North America as well, the Virgin of Guadalupe is venerated as
Queen of all America.
With the passage of time, pastors and faithful alike have grown increasingly conscious of the role
of the Virgin Mary in the evangelization of America. In the prayer composed for the Special
Assembly for America of the Synod of Bishops, Holy Mary of Guadalupe is invoked as “Patroness
of all America and Star of the first and new evangelization”. In view of this, I welcome with joy the
proposal of the Synod Fathers that the feast of Our Lady of Guadalupe, Mother and Evangelizer of
America, be celebrated throughout the continent on December It is my heartfelt hope that
she, whose intercession was responsible for strengthening the faith of the first disciples, will by her maternal intercession guide the Church in America, obtaining the outpouring of
the Holy Spirit, as she once did for the early Church, so that the new evangelization
may yield a splendid flowering of Christian life.
Places of encounter with Christ
Trusting in the help of Mary, the Church in America desires to lead the men and women of the
continent to encounter Christ. This encounter will be the starting-point of authentic conversion and
of renewed communion and solidarity. Such an encounter will contribute greatly to strengthening
the faith of many Catholics, helping them to mature in strong, lively and active faith.
Lest the search for Christ present in his Church become something merely abstract, we need to
indicate the specific times and places in which, in the Church, it is possible to encounter him. Here
the reflections of the Synod Fathers offered abundant suggestions and observations.
They pointed above all to “Sacred Scripture read in the light of Tradition, the Fathers and the
Magisterium, and more deeply understood through meditation and prayer”. A recommendation
was made to promote knowledge of the Gospels, which proclaim in words easily understood by all
the way Jesus lived among the people of his time. Reading these sacred texts and listening to
Jesus as attentively as did the multitudes of the mount of the Beatitudes, or on the shore of the
Lake of Tiberias as he preached from the boat, produces authentic fruits of conversion of heart.
A second place of encounter with Jesus is the sacred Liturgy. Thanks to the Second Vatican
Council, we have a very rich account of the manifold presence of Christ in the Liturgy, the
importance of which should lead to it being a theme of constant preaching. Christ is present in the
celebrant who renews at the altar the one and only Sacrifice of the Cross; he is present in the
Sacraments through which he exercises his efficacious power. When his word is proclaimed, it is
he himself who speaks to us. He is also present in the community, by virtue of his promise that
“where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them”. He is
present “especially under the Eucharistic species”. My Predecessor Paul VI deemed it
necessary to explain the uniqueness of Christ's real presence in the Eucharist, which “is called
'real' not to exclude the idea that the others are 'real' too, but rather to indicate presence par
excellence, because it is substantial”. Under the species of bread and wine, “Christ is present,
whole and entire in his physical 'reality', corporally present”.
The Scriptures and the Eucharist, places of encounter with Christ, are evoked in the story of the
apparition of the Risen Jesus to the disciples of Emmaus. The Gospel text concerning the final
judgment, which states that we will be judged on our love towards the needy in
whom the Lord Jesus is mysteriously present, indicates that we must not neglect a third place of
encounter with Christ: “the persons, especially the poor, with whom Christ identifies himself”.
At the closing of the Second Vatican Council, Pope Paul VI recalled that “on the face of every
human being, especially when marked by tears and sufferings, we can and must see the face of
Christ, the Son of Man”.
ENCOUNTERING JESUS CHRIST
IN AMERICA TODAY
“From those who have received much,
much will be required”
The situation of the men and women of America and their encounter with the Lord
The Gospels tell of Jesus encountering people in very diverse situations. At times these are
situations of sin, which show the need for conversion and the Lord's forgiveness. At other
moments we find people searching for the truth and genuinely trusting in Jesus — positive
attitudes which help to establish a friendship with him and awaken the desire to imitate him. Nor
can we forget the gifts with which the Lord prepares some people for a later encounter. Thus, by
making Mary “full of grace”  from the very beginning, God prepared her for the realization
in her of God's supreme encounter with human nature: the ineffable mystery of the Incarnation.
Like the social virtues, sins do not exist in the abstract, but are the consequence of personal
acts. Hence it is necessary to bear in mind that America today is a complex reality, the result
of the attitudes and actions of the men and women who live there. It is in this real and concrete
situation that they must encounter Jesus.
The Christian identity of America
The greatest gift which America has received from the Lord is the faith which has forged its
Christian identity. For more than five hundred years the name of Christ has been proclaimed on
the continent. The evangelization which accompanied the European migrations has shaped
America's religious profile, marked by moral values which, though they are not always consistently
practiced and at times are cast into doubt, are in a sense the heritage of all Americans, even of
those who do not explicitly recognize this fact. Clearly, America's Christian identity is not
synonymous with Catholic identity. The presence of other Christian communities, to a greater or
lesser degree in the different parts of America, means that the ecumenical commitment to seek
unity among all those who believe in Christ is especially urgent.
The fruits of holiness in America
The Saints are the true expression and the finest fruits of America's Christian identity. In them,
the encounter with the living Christ “is so deep and demanding... that it becomes a fire which
consumes them completely and impels them to build his Kingdom, to the point that Christ and the
new Covenant are the meaning and the soul... of personal and communal life”. The fruits of
holiness have flourished from the first days of the evangelization of America. Thus we have Saint
Rose of Lima (1586-1617), “the New World's first flower of holiness”, proclaimed principal
patroness of America in 1670 by Pope Clement X. After her, the list of American saints has
grown to its present length. The beatifications and canonizations which have raised many
sons and daughters of the continent to public veneration provide heroic models of the Christian life
across the range of nations and social backgrounds. In beatifying or canonizing them, the Church
points to them as powerful intercessors made one with Christ, the eternal High Priest, the mediator
between God and man. The Saints and the Beatified of America accompany the men and women
of today with fraternal concern in all their joys and sufferings, until the final encounter with the
Lord. With a view to encouraging the faithful to imitate them ever more closely and to seek
their intercession more frequently and fruitfully, the Synod Fathers proposed — and I find this a
very timely initiative — that there be prepared “a collection of short biographies of the Saints and
the Beatified of America, which can shed light on and stimulate the response to the universal call
to holiness in America”.
Among the Saints it has produced, “the history of the evangelization of America numbers many
martyrs, men and women, Bishops and priests, consecrated religious and lay people who have
given life... to [these] nations with their blood. Like a cloud of witnesses, they stir
us to take up fearlessly and fervently today's task of the new evangelization”. Their example of
boundless dedication to the cause of the Gospel must not only be saved from oblivion, but must
become better and more widely known among the faithful of the continent. In this regard, I wrote in
Tertio Millennio Adveniente: “The local Churches should do everything possible to ensure that the
memory of those who have suffered martyrdom should be safeguarded, gathering the necessary
documentation”.
Popular piety
A distinctive feature of America is an intense popular piety, deeply rooted in the various
nations. It is found at all levels and in all sectors of society, and it has special importance as a
place of encounter with Christ for all those who in poverty of spirit and humility of heart are
sincerely searching for God. This piety takes many forms: “Pilgrimages to shrines of
Christ, of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, prayer for the souls in purgatory, the use of
sacramentals (water, oil, candles...). These and other forms of popular piety are an opportunity
for the faithful to encounter the living Christ”. The Synod Fathers stressed the urgency of
discovering the true spiritual values present in popular religiosity, so that, enriched by genuine
Catholic doctrine, it might lead to a sincere conversion and a practical exercise of charity. If
properly guided, popular piety also leads the faithful to a deeper sense of their membership of the
Church, increasing the fervor of their attachment and thus offering an effective response to the
challenges of today's secularization.
Given that in America, popular piety is a mode of inculturation of the Catholic faith and that it has
often assumed indigenous religious forms, we must not underestimate the fact that, prudently
considered, it too can provide valid cues for a more complete inculturation of the Gospel. This
is especially important among the indigenous peoples, in order that “the seeds of the Word” found
in their culture may come to their fullness in Christ. The same is true for Americans of African
origin. The Church “recognizes that it must approach these Americans from within their own
culture, taking seriously the spiritual and human riches of that culture which appear in the way they
worship, their sense of joy and solidarity, their language and their traditions”.
The Eastern Catholic presence
Immigration is an almost constant feature of America's history from the beginning of
evangelization to our own day. As part of this complex phenomenon, we see that in recent times
different parts of America have welcomed many members of the Eastern Catholic Churches who,
for various reasons, have left their native lands. A first wave of immigration came especially from
Western Ukraine; and then it involved the nations of the Middle East. This made it pastorally
necessary to establish an Eastern Catholic hierarchy for these Catholic immigrants and their
descendants. The Synod Fathers recalled the norms given by the Second Vatican Council, which
recognize that the Eastern Churches “have the right and the duty to govern themselves according
to their own particular discipline”, given the mission they have of bearing witness to an ancient
doctrinal, liturgical and monastic tradition. Moreover, these Churches have a duty to maintain their
own disciplines, since these “correspond better to the customs of their faithful and are judged to be
better suited to provide for the good of souls”. The universal Church needs a synergy between
the particular Churches of East and West so that she may breathe with her two lungs, in the hope
of one day doing so in perfect communion between the Catholic Church and the separated
Eastern Churches. Therefore, we cannot but rejoice that the Eastern Churches have in recent
times taken root in America alongside the Latin Churches present there from the beginning, thus
making the catholicity of the Lord's Church appear more clearly.
The Church in the field of education and social action
One of the reasons for the Church's influence on the Christian formation of Americans is her
vast presence in the field of education and especially in the university world. The many Catholic
universities spread throughout the continent are a typical feature of Church life in America. Also in
the field of primary and secondary education, the large number of Catholic schools makes
possible a wide-ranging evangelizing effort, as long as there is a clear will to impart a truly
Christian education.
Another important area in which the Church is present in every part of America is social and
charitable work. The many initiatives on behalf of the elderly, the sick and the needy, through
nursing homes, hospitals, dispensaries, canteens providing free meals, and other social centers
are a concrete testimony of the preferential love for the poor which the Church in America
nurtures. She does so because of her love for the Lord and because she is aware that “Jesus
identified himself with the poor ”. In this task which has no limits, the Church
in America has been able to create a sense of practical solidarity among the various communities
of the continent and of the world, showing in this way the fraternal spirit which must characterize
Christians in every time and place.
For this service of the poor to be both evangelical and evangelizing, it must faithfully reflect the
attitude of Jesus, who came “to proclaim Good News to the poor”. When offered in this
spirit, the service of the poor shows forth God's infinite love for all people and becomes an
effective way of communicating the hope of salvation which Christ has brought to the world, a
hope which glows in a special way when it is shared with those abandoned or rejected by society.
This constant dedication to the poor and disadvantaged emerges in the Church's social teaching,
which ceaselessly invites the Christian community to a commitment to overcome every form of
exploitation and oppression. It is a question not only of alleviating the most serious and urgent
needs through individual actions here and there, but of uncovering the roots of evil and proposing
initiatives to make social, political and economic structures more just and fraternal.
Growing respect for human rights
Among the positive aspects of America today, we see in civil society a growing support
throughout the continent for democratic political systems and the gradual retreat of dictatorial
regimes; this has immediate moral implications. The Church looks sympathetically upon this
evolution insofar as it favors an ever more marked respect for the rights of each individual,
including those accused and condemned, against whom it is never legitimate to resort to modes of
detention and investigation — one thinks especially of torture — which are offensive to human
dignity. “The rule of law is the necessary condition for establishing true democracy”.
There can be no rule of law, however, unless citizens and especially leaders are convinced that
there is no freedom without truth. In effect, “the grave problems which threaten the dignity of
the human person, the family, marriage, education, the economy and working conditions, the
quality of life and life itself, raise the question of the rule of law”. The Synod Fathers rightly
stressed that “the fundamental rights of the human person are inscribed in human nature itself,
they are willed by God and therefore call for universal observance and acceptance. No human
authority can infringe upon them by appealing to majority opinion or political consensus, on the
pretext of respect for pluralism and democracy. Therefore, the Church must be committed to the
task of educating and supporting lay people involved in law-making, government and the
administration of justice, so that legislation will always reflect those principles and moral values
which are in conformity with a sound anthropology and advance the common good”.
The phenomenon of globalization
A feature of the contemporary world is the tendency towards globalization, a phenomenon
which, although not exclusively American, is more obvious and has greater repercussions in
America. It is a process made inevitable by increasing communication between the different parts
of the world, leading in practice to overcoming distances, with evident effects in widely different
fields.
The ethical implications can be positive or negative. There is an economic globalization which
brings some positive consequences, such as efficiency and increased production and which, with
the development of economic links between the different countries, can help to bring greater unity
among peoples and make possible a better service to the human family. However, if globalization
is ruled merely by the laws of the market applied to suit the powerful, the consequences cannot
but be negative. These are, for example, the absolutizing of the economy, unemployment, the
reduction and deterioration of public services, the destruction of the environment and natural
resources, the growing distance between rich and poor, unfair competition which puts the poor
nations in a situation of ever increasing inferiority. While acknowledging the positive values
which come with globalization, the Church considers with concern the negative aspects which
follow in its wake.
And what should we say about the cultural globalization produced by the power of the media?
Everywhere the media impose new scales of values which are often arbitrary and basically
materialistic, in the face of which it is difficult to maintain a lively commitment to the values of the
Gospel.
Growing urbanization
Also on the increase in America is the phenomenon of urbanization. For some time now the
continent has been experiencing a constant exodus from the countryside to the city. This is a
complex phenomenon already described by my Predecessor Paul VI. There are different
reasons for it, but chief among them are poverty and underdevelopment in rural areas, where
utilities, transportation, and educational and health services are often inadequate. Moreover, the
city, with the allure of entertainment and prosperity often presented in the media, exerts a special
attraction for simple people from country areas.
The frequent lack of planning in this process is a source of many evils. As the Synod Fathers
pointed out, “in certain cases, some urban areas are like islands where violence, juvenile
delinquency and an air of desperation flourish”. The phenomenon of urbanization therefore
presents great challenges for the Church's pastoral action, which must address cultural
rootlessness, the loss of family traditions and of people's particular religious traditions. As a result,
faith is often weakened because it is deprived of the expressions that helped to keep it alive.
The evangelization of urban culture is a formidable challenge for the Church. Just as she was able
to evangelize rural culture for centuries, the Church is called in the same way today to undertake a
methodical and far-reaching urban evangelization through catechesis, the liturgy and the very way
in which her pastoral structures are organized.
The burden of external debt
The Synod Fathers voiced concern about the external debt afflicting many American nations
and expressed solidarity with them. They were consistent in reminding public opinion of the
complexity of this issue, acknowledging that “the debt is often the result of corruption and poor
administration”. In keeping with the spirit of the Synod's deliberations, such an
acknowledgment does not mean to place on one side all the blame for a phenomenon which is
extremely complex in its origin and in the solutions which it demands.
Among the causes which have helped to create massive external debt are not only high interest
rates, caused by speculative financial policies, but also the irresponsibility of people in government
who, in incurring debt, have given too little thought to the real possibility of repaying it. This has
been aggravated by the fact that huge sums obtained through international loans sometimes go to
enrich individuals instead of being used to pay for the changes needed for the country's
development. At the same time, it would be unjust to impose the burden resulting from these
irresponsible decisions upon those who did not make them. The gravity of the situation is all the
more evident when we consider that “even the payment of interest alone represents a burden for
the economy of poor nations, which deprives the authorities of the money necessary for social
development, education, health and the establishment of a fund to create jobs”.
Corruption
Corruption is often among the causes of crushing public debt, and is therefore a serious
problem which needs to be considered carefully. “Respecting no boundaries, [corruption] involves
persons, public and private structures of power and the governing elites”. It creates a situation
which “encourages impunity and the illicit accumulation of money, lack of trust in political
institutions, especially the administration of justice and public investments, which are not always
transparent, equal for all and effective”.
Here I wish to recall what I wrote in the Message for the 1998 World Day of Peace — that the
plague of corruption needs to be denounced and combatted forcefully by those in authority, with
“the generous support of all citizens, sustained by a firm moral conscience”. Appropriate
supervisory bodies and transparency in economic and financial transactions are helpful and in
many cases stop the spread of corruption, the dire consequences of which fall in the main upon
the weakest and most marginal members of society. It is also the poor who are the first to suffer as
a result of delays and inefficiency, by not being properly defended, because of structural
deficiencies, especially when corruption affects the administration of justice itself.
The drug trade
The drug trade and drug use represent a grave threat to the social fabric of American nations.
The drug trade “contributes to crime and violence, to the destruction of family life, to the physical
and emotional destruction of many individuals and communities, especially among the young. It
also undermines the ethical dimension of work and increases the number of people in prison — in
a word, it leads to the degradation of the person created in the image of God”. This
devastating trade also leads to “the ruin of governments and erodes economic security and the
stability of nations”. Here we are facing one of the most urgent challenges which many nations
around the world need to address: it is in fact a challenge which threatens many features of the
human progress achieved in recent times. For some American nations, the production, trafficking
and use of drugs are factors which tarnish their international reputation, because they reduce their
credibility and render more difficult the cooperation which they seek with other countries and which
is so essential nowadays for harmonious social development.
Ecological concern
“And God saw that it was good”. These words from the first chapter of the Book of
Genesis reveal the meaning of what God has done. To men and women, the crown of the entire
process of creation, the Creator entrusts the care of the earth. This brings concrete
obligations in the area of ecology for every person. Fulfilfulfillment of these obligations supposes an
openness to a spiritual and ethical perspective capable of overcoming selfish attitudes and “lifestyles which lead to the depletion of natural resources”.
In this area too, so relevant today, the action of believers is more important than ever. Alongside
legislative and governmental bodies, all people of good will must work to ensure the effective
protection of the environment, understood as a gift from God. How much ecological abuse and
destruction there is in many parts of America! It is enough to think of the uncontrolled emission of
harmful gases or the dramatic phenomenon of forest fires, sometimes deliberately set by people
driven by selfish interest. Devastations such as these could lead to the desertification of many
parts of America, with the inevitable consequences of hunger and misery. This is an especially
urgent problem in the forests of Amazonia, an immense territory extending into different countries:
from Brazil to Guyana, Surinam, Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia. This is one
of the world's most precious natural regions because of its bio-diversity which makes it vital for the
environmental balance of the entire planet.
II
THE PATH OF CONVERSION
“Repent therefore and be converted”
The urgency of the call to conversion
“The time is led and the kingdom of God is close at hand: repent and believe the Good
News”. These words with which Jesus began his Galilean ministry still echo in the ears
of Bishops, priests, deacons, consecrated men and women and the lay faithful throughout
America. Both the recent celebration of the fifth centenary of the first evangelization of America
and the commemoration of the two thousandth anniversary of the birth of Jesus, the Great Jubilee
we are preparing to celebrate, summon everyone alike to a deeper sense of our Christian
vocation. The greatness of the Incarnation and gratitude for the gift of the first proclamation of the
Gospel in America are an invitation to respond readily to Christ with a more decisive personal
conversion and a stimulus to ever more generous fidelity to the Gospel. Christ's call to conversion
finds an echo in the words of the Apostle: “It is time now to wake from sleep, because our
salvation is closer than when we first became believers”. The encounter with the
living Jesus impels us to conversion.
In speaking of conversion, the New Testament uses the word metanoia, which means a change of
mentality. It is not simply a matter of thinking differently in an intellectual sense, but of revising the
reasons behind one's actions in the light of the Gospel. In this regard, Saint Paul speaks of “faith
working through love”. This means that true conversion needs to be prepared and
nurtured though the prayerful reading of Sacred Scripture and the practice of the Sacraments of
Reconciliation and the Eucharist. Conversion leads to fraternal communion, because it enables us
to understand that Christ is the head of the Church, his Mystical Body; it urges solidarity, because
it makes us aware that whatever we do for others, especially for the poorest, we do for Christ
himself. Conversion, therefore, fosters a new life, in which there is no separation between faith
and works in our daily response to the universal call to holiness. In order to speak of conversion,
the gap between faith and life must be bridged. Where this gap exists, Christians are such only in
name. To be true disciples of the Lord, believers must bear witness to their faith, and “witnesses
testify not only with words, but also with their lives”. We must keep in mind the words of Jesus:
“Not every one who says to me, 'Lord, Lord!' shall enter the kingdom of heaven, but he who does
the will of my Father who is in heaven”. Openness to the Father's will supposes a total
self-giving, including even the gift of one's life: “The greatest witness is martyrdom”.
The social dimension of conversion
Yet conversion is incomplete if we are not aware of the demands of the Christian life and if we
do not strive to meet them. In this regard, the Synod Fathers noted that unfortunately “at both the
personal and communal level there are great shortcomings in relation to a more profound
conversion and with regard to relationships between sectors, institutions and groups within the
Church”. “He who does not love his brother whom he has seen, cannot love God whom he has
not seen”.
Fraternal charity means attending to all the needs of our neighbor. “If any one has the world's
goods and sees his brother in need, yet closes his heart against him, how does God's love abide
in him?”. Hence, for the Christian people of America conversion to the Gospel means
to revise “all the different areas and aspects of life, especially those related to the social order and
the pursuit of the common good”. It will be especially necessary “to nurture the growing
awareness in society of the dignity of every person and, therefore, to promote in the community a
sense of the duty to participate in political life in harmony with the Gospel”. Involvement in the
political field is clearly part of the vocation and activity of the lay faithful.
In this regard, however, it is most important, especially in a pluralistic society, to understand
correctly the relationship between the political community and the Church, and to distinguish
clearly between what individual believers or groups of believers undertake in their own name as
citizens guided by Christian conscience and what they do in the name of the Church in
communion with their Pastors. The Church which, in virtue of her office and competence, can in no
way be confused with the political community nor be tied to any political system, is both a sign and
safeguard of the transcendent character of the human person.
Continuing conversion
In this life, conversion is a goal which is never fully attained: on the path which the disciple is
called to follow in the footsteps of Jesus, conversion is a lifelong task. While we are in this world,
our intention to repent is always exposed to temptations. Since “no one can serve two masters”
, the change of mentality (metanoia) means striving to assimilate the values of the
Gospel, which contradict the dominant tendencies of the world. Hence there is a need to renew
constantly “the encounter with the living Jesus Christ”, since this, as the Synod Fathers pointed
out, is the way “which leads us to continuing conversion”.
The universal call to conversion has special implications for the Church in America, involved as
she is in the renewal of faith. The Synod Fathers expressed this very specific and demanding task
in this way: “This conversion demands especially of us Bishops a genuine identification with the
personal style of Jesus Christ, who leads us to simplicity, poverty, responsibility for others and the
renunciation of our own advantage, so that, like him and not trusting in human means, we may
draw from the strength of the Holy Spirit and of the Word all the power of the Gospel, remaining
open above all to those who are furthest away and excluded”. To be Pastors after God's own
heart, it is essential to adopt a mode of living which makes us like the one who says
of himself: “I am the good shepherd”, and to whom Saint Paul points when he writes:
“Imitate me as I imitate Christ”.
Guided by the Holy Spirit to a new way of living
The proposal of a new style of life applies not only to the Pastors, but to all Christians living in
America. They are asked to know more deeply and to make their own a genuine Christian
spirituality. “In effect, the term spirituality means a mode or form of life in keeping with Christian
demands. Spirituality is 'life in Christ' and 'in the Spirit', which is accepted in faith, expressed in
love and inspired by hope, and so becomes the daily life of the Church community”. In this
sense, by spirituality, which is the goal of conversion, we mean “not a part of life, but the whole of
life guided by the Holy Spirit”. Among the many elements of spirituality which all Christians
must make their own, prayer holds a pre-eminent place. Prayer leads Christians “little by little to
acquire a contemplative view of reality, enabling them to recognize God in every moment and in
every thing; to contemplate God in every person; to seek his will in all that happens”.
Prayer, both personal and liturgical, is the duty of every Christian. “Jesus Christ, the Good News of
the Father, warns us that without him we can do nothing. He himself, in the decisive
moments of his life, before doing something, used to withdraw to an isolated place to give himself
to prayer and contemplation, and he asked the Apostles to do the same”. He tells his disciples
without exception: “Go into your room and shut the door and pray to your Father who is in secret”. This intense life of prayer must be adapted to the capacity and condition of each
Christian, so that in all the different situations of life each one may be able “to drink of the one
Spirit  from the wellspring of their encounter with Christ”. In this sense,
contemplation is not a privilege reserved to the few; on the contrary, in parishes, in communities
and movements there is a need to foster a spirituality clearly oriented to contemplation of the
fundamental truths of faith: the mysteries of the Trinity, the Incarnation of the Word, the
Redemption of humanity, and the other great saving works of God.
Men and women who are dedicated exclusively to the contemplative life accomplish a
fundamental mission in the Church in America. As the Second Vatican Council put it, they are “a
glory of the Church and a source of heavenly graces”. Therefore, the monasteries which exist
throughout the continent must be “especially loved by the Pastors, who should be deeply
convinced that souls dedicated to the contemplative life obtain an abundance of grace, through the
prayer, penance and contemplation to which they have given their lives. Contemplatives must
know that they are part of the Church's mission in the present and that, by the witness of their
lives, they work for the spiritual good of the faithful, and help them to seek the face of God in
everyday life”.
Christian spirituality is nourished above all by a constant sacramental life, since the Sacraments
are the root and endless source of God's grace which believers need to sustain them on their
earthly pilgrimage. The sacramental life needs to be complemented by the values of popular piety,
values which will be enriched in turn by sacramental practice and saved from falling into the
danger of routine. It should also be noted that this spirituality is not opposed to the social
responsibilities of the Christian life. On the contrary, in following the path of prayer, believers
become more conscious of the Gospel's demands and of their duties towards others. Through
prayer, they are strengthened with the grace they need to persevere in doing good. In order to
mature spiritually, Christians do well to seek the counsel of the Church's ministers or of other
persons expert in the field of spiritual direction, which is a traditional practice in the Church. The
Synod Fathers felt that it was necessary to recommend to priests this important ministry.
The universal call to holiness
“Be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy”. The Special Assembly for America of the
Synod of Bishops has wished to offer a forceful reminder to all Christians of the importance of the
doctrine of the universal call to holiness in the Church. This is one of the key points of the
Second Vatican Council's Dogmatic Constitution on the Church. Conversion is directed to
holiness, since conversion “is not an end in itself but a journey towards God who is holy. To be
holy is to be like God and to glorify his name in the works which we accomplish in our lives ”. On the path of holiness, Jesus Christ is the point of reference and the model to be
imitated: he is “the Holy One of God”, and was recognized as such. It is he who
teaches us that the heart of holiness is love, which leads even to giving our lives for others. Therefore, to imitate the holiness of God, as it was made manifest in Jesus Christ his Son,
“is nothing other than to extend in history his love, especially towards the poor, the sick and the
needy”.
Jesus, the one way to holiness
“I am the Way, the Truth and the Life”. With these words, Jesus presents himself as
the one path which leads to holiness. But a specific knowledge of this way comes chiefly through
the word of God which the Church proclaims in her preaching. Therefore, the Church in America
“must give a clear priority to prayerful reflection on Sacred Scripture by all the faithful”. This
reading of the Bible, accompanied by prayer, is known in the tradition of the Church as lectio
divina, and it is a practice to be encouraged among all Christians. For priests, the lectio divina
must be a basic feature of the preparation of their homilies, especially the Sunday homily.
Penance and reconciliation
Conversion (metanoia), to which every person is called, leads to an acceptance and
appropriation of the new vision which the Gospel proposes. This requires leaving behind our
worldly way of thinking and acting, which so often heavily conditions our behavior. As Sacred
Scripture reminds us, the old man must die and the new man must be born, that is, the whole
person must be renewed “in full knowledge after the image of the Creator”. Strongly
recommended on this path of conversion and quest for holiness are “the ascetical practices which
have always been part of the Church's life and which culminate in the Sacrament of forgiveness,
received and celebrated with the right dispositions”. Only those reconciled with God can be
prime agents of true reconciliation with and among their brothers and sisters.
The present crisis of the Sacrament of Penance, from which the Church in America is not exempt
and about which I have voiced my concern from the beginning of my Pontificate, will be
overcome by resolute and patient pastoral efforts.
On this point, the Synod Fathers rightly asked “that priests give the necessary time to the
Sacrament of Penance, and strongly and insistently invite the faithful to receive the Sacrament,
without the Pastors themselves neglecting frequent confession in their own lives”. Bishops and
priests personally experience the mysterious encounter with the forgiving Christ in the Sacrament
of Penance and they are privileged witnesses of his merciful love.
The Catholic Church, which embraces men and women “of every nation, race, people and tongue”
 is called to be, “in a world marked by ideological, ethnic, economic and cultural
divisions”, the “living sign of the unity of the human family”. In the multiplicity of nations and the
variety of ethnic groups, as in the features common to the entire continent, America presents
many differences which cannot be ignored and which the Church has the duty to address. Thanks
to effective efforts to integrate the members of the People of God within each country and to unite
the members of the particular Churches of the various countries, today's differences can be a
source of mutual enrichment. As the Synod Fathers rightly affirmed, “it is most important that the
Church throughout America be a living sign of reconciled communion, an enduring appeal to
solidarity and a witness ever present in our various political, economic and social systems”.
This is a significant contribution which believers can make to the unity of the American continent.
V
THE PATH TO COMMUNION
“As you, Father, are in me and I in you,
may they also be one in us”
The Church, sacrament of communion
“Faced with a divided world which is in search of unity, we must proclaim with joy and firm faith
that God is communion, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, unity in distinction, and that he calls all
people to share in that same Trinitarian communion. We must proclaim that this communion is the
magnificent plan of God the Father; that Jesus Christ, the Incarnate Lord, is the heart of this
communion, and that the Holy Spirit works ceaselessly to create communion and to restore it
when it is broken. We must proclaim that the Church is the sign and instrument of the communion
willed by God, begun in time and destined for completion in the fullness of the Kingdom”. The
Church is the sign of communion because her members, like branches, share the life of Christ, the
true vine. Through communion with Christ, Head of the Mystical Body, we enter into
living communion with all believers.
This communion, present in the Church and essential to her nature, must be made visible in
concrete signs, “such as communal prayer for one another, the desire for closer relations between
Episcopal Conferences and between Bishops, fraternal ties between dioceses and parishes, and
communication among pastoral workers with a view to specific missionary works”. Communion
requires that the deposit of faith be preserved in its purity and integrity, together with the unity of
the College of Bishops under the authority of the Successor of Peter. In this context, the Synod
Fathers stressed that “the strengthening of the Petrine ministry is fundamental for the preservation
of the Church's unity”, and that “the full exercise of the primacy of Peter is fundamental for the
Church's identity and vitality in America”.  By the Lord's mandate, Peter and his Successors
have the task of confirming their brethren in faith  and of feeding the entire flock of
Christ. The Successor of the Prince of the Apostles is called to be the rock upon
which the Church is built, and to exercise the ministry belonging to the one to whom the keys of
the Kingdom were given. The Vicar of Christ is in fact “the enduring principle of
unity and the visible foundation” of the Church.
Christian initiation and communion
Communion of life in the Church comes through the sacraments of Christian initiation:
Baptism, Confirmation and the Eucharist. Baptism is “the doorway to the spiritual life; it makes us
members of Christ and draws us into the body of the Church”.  In Confirmation, the baptized
“are joined more completely to the Church, they are enriched with special strength by the Holy
Spirit and thus are more solemnly obliged to spread and defend the faith in word and deed as true
witnesses of Christ”.  The journey of Christian initiation comes to completion and reaches its
summit in the Eucharist, which fully incorporates the baptized into the Body of Christ.
“These sacraments are an excellent opportunity for an effective evangelization and catechesis,
when preparation for them is entrusted to people of faith and competence”.  While dioceses
in America have made undeniable progress in preparing people for the sacraments of Christian
initiation, the Synod Fathers nonetheless expressed regret that “many receive them without
adequate formation”.  In the case of the Baptism of children, efforts to catechize the parents
and godparents should not be spared.
The Eucharist as center of communion with God and with each other
The Eucharist is more than simply the culmination of Christian initiation. While Baptism and
Confirmation serve as a beginning and introduction to the life of the Church and cannot be
repeated,  the Eucharist is the living and lasting center around which the entire community of
the Church gathers.  The various aspects of the Eucharist reveal its inexhaustible wealth: it is
at one and the same time a Sacrament of Sacrifice, Communion and Presence.
The Eucharist is the outstanding moment of encounter with the living Christ. For this reason, by
their preaching and catechesis, the Pastors of the People of God in America must strive “to give
the Sunday Eucharistic celebration new strength, as the source and summit of the Church's life,
the safeguard of communion in the Body of Christ, and an invitation to solidarity, expressing the
Lord's command: 'Love one another as I have loved you' ”.  As the Synod Fathers
suggest, an effort of this kind must include a number of fundamental aspects. First of all, there is a
need to renew in the faithful the sense that the Eucharist is an immense gift: this will lead them to
do all they can to participate actively and worthily, at least on Sundays and Holy Days. At the
same time, “efforts by priests to make attendance possible, even for the most distant communities”
must be encouraged.  The faithful need to be reminded that “their full, conscious and active
participation, although essentially distinct from the office of the ordained priest, is an exercise of
the common priesthood received in Baptism”.
The need of the faithful to attend the Eucharist and the difficulties that arise from the shortage of
priests make clear how urgent it is to promote priestly vocations.  The whole Church in
America needs to be reminded also of “the link between the Eucharist and charity”,  a link
which was expressed in the early Church by the joining of the agape and the Eucharistic Supper.
 As a result of the grace received in the Sacrament, sharing in the Eucharist must lead to a
more fervent exercise of charity.
The Bishops as builders of communion
Precisely because it signifies life, communion in the Church must constantly increase.
Therefore, the Bishops, remembering that “each of them is the visible principle and foundation of
the unity of his particular Church”,  cannot but feel duty-bound to promote communion in their
dioceses, so that the drive for a new evangelization in America may be more effective. Working in
favor of this communion are the structures which the Second Vatican Council called for as a
means of supporting the diocesan Bishop's work, and which post-conciliar legislation has spelled
out in greater detail.  “It is up to the Bishop, with the help of the priests, deacons, religious
and lay people to implement a coordinated pastoral plan, which is systematic and participatory,
involving all the members of the Church and awakening in them a missionary consciousness”.
Each Ordinary will make sure to promote among priests and lay faithful the sense that the diocese
is the visible expression of the Church's communion, which is formed at the table of the Word and
of the Eucharist, around the Bishop in union with the College of Bishops and under its head, the
Roman Pontiff. As a particular Church, the diocese is charged with initiating and deepening the
encounter of all the members of God's People with Jesus Christ,  respecting and fostering
that plurality and diversivification which are not obstacles to unity but which give it the character of
communion.  The spirit of participation and shared responsibility in the working of diocesan
structures will certainly be strengthened if the nature of the particular Church is better known and
appreciated.
Deeper communion between the particular Churches
The Special Assembly for America of the Synod of Bishops was the first ever to have gathered
Bishops from the entire continent, and it was seen by all as a special grace of the Lord to the
pilgrim Church in America. It strengthened the communion which must exist among the ecclesial
communities of the continent, making clear to all the need for this communion to grow.
Experiences of episcopal communion, more frequent since the Second Vatican Council as a result
of the growth of Bishops' Conferences, should be seen as encounters with the living Christ,
present in the brothers gathered in his name.
The experience of the Synod showed just as clearly the value of a communion transcending
individual Conferences of Bishops. Even though structures for dialogue between Conferences
already exist, the Synod Fathers underlined the benefit of inter-American gatherings, such as
those sponsored by the Episcopal Conferences of various American countries, as an expression
of practical solidarity and a chance to study common challenges to evangelization in America.
 It would be helpful to specify more exactly the nature of these meetings, so that they may
become a better expression of communion among all Bishops. Beyond these more inclusive
meetings, it could be useful, whenever circumstances require it, to establish special commissions
to explore more deeply issues which concern America as a whole. Areas in which it seems
especially necessary “to strengthen cooperation are the sharing of information on pastoral matters,
missionary collaboration, education, immigration and ecumenism”.
The Bishops, whose duty it is to promote communion among the particular Churches, should
encourage the faithful to live this communion more and more, and to assume the “responsibility of
developing bonds of communion with the local Churches in other areas of America through
education, the exchange of information, fraternal ties between parishes and dioceses, and projects
involving cooperation and joint intervention in questions of greater importance, especially those
affecting the poor”.
Fraternal communion with the Eastern Catholic Churches
The recent phenomenon of the establishment and development in America of Eastern Catholic
particular Churches, with their own hierarchy, was a matter of special attention on the part of some
Synod Fathers. A genuine desire to embrace, in ways both cordial and practical, these brethren in
the faith and in hierarchical communion under the Successor of Peter led the Synod to propose
concrete ways for the particular Churches of the Latin rite to offer fraternal assistance to the
Eastern Catholic Churches throughout the continent. Thus, for example, the possibility was raised
that Latin rite priests, especially those with Eastern roots, might offer liturgical assistance to
Eastern communities which do not have enough priests of their own. Likewise, with regard to
sacred buildings, the Eastern faithful could use Latin rite Churches wherever this seems
appropriate.
In this spirit of communion, it is worth considering a few proposals of the Synod Fathers: namely,
that — where necessary — mixed commissions charged with studying common pastoral problems
be created in national Episcopal Conferences and in international agencies for cooperation among
Bishops; that catechesis and theological formation for lay people and seminarians of the Latin
Church include knowledge of the living tradition of the Christian East; that the Bishops of the
Eastern Catholic Churches participate in the Latin Episcopal Conferences of the different
countries.  This fraternal cooperation, while offering valuable help to the Eastern Churches of
recent foundation in America, will certainly also enrich the particular Churches of the Latin rite with
the spiritual heritage of the Eastern Christian tradition.
The priesthood as a sign of unity
“As a member of a particular Church, each priest must be a sign of communion with the
Bishop, since he is his immediate collaborator, in union with his brothers in the priesthood. With
pastoral charity, he exercises his ministry, chiefly in the community entrusted to him, and he leads
his community to encounter Christ the Good Shepherd. His vocation requires him to be a sign of
unity. Therefore, he must avoid any involvement in party politics, since this would divide the
community”.  The Synod Fathers call for “a pastoral plan for diocesan clergy, to strengthen
their spirituality and their sense of mission and identity, centered on following Christ, the eternal
High Priest, always striving to obey the Father's will. Christ is the model of generous dedication, of
austerity of life and of service even unto death. The priest should be conscious of the fact that, by
virtue of the Sacrament of Orders, he is the bearer of grace, which he communicates to his
brothers and sisters in the sacraments. He himself is sanctified in the exercise of his ministry”.
The field in which priests work is vast. Therefore they should concentrate on what is essential to
their ministry: “letting themselves be configured to Christ the Head and Shepherd, the source of all
pastoral charity, offering themselves each day with Christ in the Eucharist, in order to help the
faithful both personally and communally to experience the living Jesus Christ”.  As witnesses
and disciples of the merciful Christ, they are called to be instruments of forgiveness and
reconciliation, putting themselves generously at the service of the faithful in the spirit of the
Gospel.
As pastors of the People of God in America, priests must also be alert to the challenges of the
world today and sensitive to the problems and hopes of their people, sharing their experiences
and growing, above all, in solidarity towards the poor. They should be careful to discern the
charisms and strengths of the faithful who might be leaders in the community, listening to them
and through dialogue encouraging their participation and co-responsibility. This will lead to a better
distribution of tasks, enabling priests “to dedicate themselves to what is most closely tied to the
encounter with and the proclamation of Jesus Christ, and thus to represent better within the
community the presence of Jesus who draws his people together”.
The task of discerning charisms also includes knowing how best to use those priests who show an
aptitude for special ministries. Moreover, every priest is expected to offer his fraternal help to other
priests and to turn trustingly to them in time of need.
Given the outstanding number of priests in America who, by God's grace, strive to meet the
challenges of a truly remarkable workload, I join the Synod Fathers in acknowledging and praising
their “untiring commitment as pastors, preachers of the Gospel and agents of ecclesial
communion, in thanking them and in encouraging them to continue to offer their lives in service of
the Gospel”.
Promoting vocations
The indispensable role of the priest within the community must lead all the members of the
Church in America to recognize the importance of promoting vocations. The American continent
has many young people, who represent an immense spiritual resource. Therefore, it is necessary
to foster vocations to the priesthood and religious life where they first develop, and Christian
families must be invited to support their children if they feel called to follow this path.
Vocations “are a gift of God” and “they are born in communities of faith, above all in the family, the
parish, Catholic schools and other Church organizations. Bishops and priests are particularly
responsible for encouraging vocations by personally presenting the call, and above all by their
witness of a life of fidelity, joy, enthusiasm and holiness. The entire People of God is responsible
for promoting vocations, and does so chiefly by persistent and humble prayer for vocations”.
As places which accept and train those called to the priesthood, seminaries must prepare the
future ministers of the Church to live “a solid spirituality of communion with Christ the Shepherd
and of openness to the workings of the Spirit, that will make them specially able to discern the
needs of God's People and their various charisms, and to work together”.  Therefore, in
seminaries “there should be special insistence upon specifically spiritual formation, so that through
constant conversion, the spirit of prayer, the practice of the Sacraments of the Eucharist and
Penance, the candidates may learn to be close to the Lord and learn to commit themselves
generously to pastoral work”.  Those responsible for formation should carefully supervise and
guide the seminarians towards emotional maturity so that they may be fit to embrace priestly
celibacy and be prepared to live in communion with their brother priests. They should also foster in
seminarians the capacity for critical observation so that they can discern true and false values,
since this is an essential requirement for establishing a constructive dialogue with the world of
today.
Special attention needs to be given to vocations among indigenous peoples: they need a
formation which takes account of their culture. While receiving a proper theological and pastoral
formation for their future ministry, these candidates for the priesthood should not be uprooted from
their own culture.
The Synod Fathers wished to thank and bless all those who devote their lives to the formation of
future priests in seminaries. They also invited the Bishops to assign the most suitable priests to
this work, after preparing them with specific training for this delicate mission.
Renewing parishes
The parish is a privileged place where the faithful concretely experience the Church.
Today in America as elsewhere in the world the parish is facing certain difficulties in ling its
mission. The parish needs to be constantly renewed on the basis of the principle that “the parish
must continue to be above all a Eucharistic community”.  This principle implies that “parishes
are called to be welcoming and fraternal, places of Christian initiation, of education in and
celebration of the faith, open to the full range of charisms, services and ministries, organized in a
communal and responsible way, capable of utilizing existing movements of the apostolate,
attentive to the cultural diversity of the people, open to pastoral projects which go beyond the
individual parish, and alert to the world in which they live”.
Because of the particular problems they present, special attention needs to be given to parishes in
large urban areas, where the difficulties are such that normal parish structures are inadequate and
the opportunities for the apostolate are significantly reduced. The institution of the parish,
however, retains its importance and needs to be preserved. For this, there is a need “to keep
looking for ways in which the parish and its pastoral structures can be more effective in urban
areas”.  One way of renewing parishes, especially urgent for parishes in large cities, might be
to consider the parish as a community of communities and movements.  It seems timely
therefore to form ecclesial communities and groups of a size that allows for true human
relationships. This will make it possible to live communion more intensely, ensuring that it is
fostered not only “ad intra”, but also with the parish communities to which such groups belong, and
with the entire diocesan and universal Church. In such a human context, it will be easier to gather
to hear the word of God, to reflect on the range of human problems in the light of this word, and
gradually to make responsible decisions inspired by the all-embracing love of Christ.  The
institution of the parish, thus renewed, “can be the source of great hope. It can gather people in
community, assist family life, overcome the sense of anonymity, welcome people and help them to
be involved in their neighborhood and in society”.  In this way, every parish, and especially
city parishes, can promote nowadays a more person-centered evangelization and better cooperate
with other social, educational and community work.
Moreover, “this kind of renewed parish needs as its leader a pastor who has a deep experience of
the living Christ, a missionary spirit, a father's heart, who is capable of fostering spiritual life,
preaching the Gospel and promoting cooperation. A renewed parish needs the collaboration of lay
people and therefore a director of pastoral activity and a pastor who is able to work with others.
Parishes in America should be distinguished by their missionary spirit, which leads them to reach
out to those who are faraway”.
Permanent deacons
For serious pastoral and theological reasons, the Second Vatican Council decided to restore
the diaconate as a permanent element of the hierarchy of the Latin Church, leaving to the
Episcopal Conferences, with the approval of the Supreme Pontiff, the task of assessing whether
and where to establish permanent deacons.  The experience has varied significantly, not only
in the different parts of America but even between dioceses of the same area. “Some dioceses
have trained and ordained a good number of deacons, and they are fully satisfied with their
integration and their ministry”.  Here we see with joy how deacons “sustained by the grace of
the Sacrament, in the ministry (diakonia) of the Liturgy, of the word and of charity are at the
service of the People of God, in communion with the Bishop and his priests”.  Other dioceses
have not followed this path, while elsewhere there have been difficulties in integrating permanent
deacons into the hierarchical structure.
With due respect for the freedom of the particular Churches to restore the permanent diaconate,
with the approval of the Supreme Pontiff, it is clear that for such a move to be successful there has
to be a careful selection process, solid formation and continuous attention to the suitability of the
candidates, as well as constant concern for them once they are ordained, and — in the case of
married deacons — concern as well for their families, wives and children.
Consecrated life
The history of evangelization in America bears eloquent testimony to the missionary work
accomplished by countless consecrated Religious who from the beginning proclaimed the Gospel,
defended the rights of the indigenous peoples and, with heroic love for Christ, dedicated
themselves to service of the People of God on the continent.  The contribution of Religious to
the proclamation of the Gospel in America is still enormously important; it is a varied contribution
shaped by the charisms of each group: “Institutes of contemplative life which witness to God as
absolute; apostolic and missionary Institutes which make Christ present in all the many different
areas of human life; Secular Institutes which help to resolve the tension between real openness to
the values of the modern world and the profound offering of one's heart to God. New Institutes and
new forms of consecrated life are also coming into being, and these require evangelical
discernment”.
Since “the future of the new evangelization... is unthinkable without the renewed contribution of
women, especially women Religious”,  it is urgent to promote their participation in the various
areas of Church life, including decision-making processes, especially on issues which concern
them directly.
“Today too the witness of a life consecrated completely to God is an eloquent proclamation of the
fact that God suffices to give fulfillment to the life of each person”.  This consecration to the
Lord must become generous service in the spreading of God's Kingdom. For this reason, on the
threshold of the Third Millennium, it is necessary to ensure “that consecrated life be more highly
esteemed and promoted by Bishops, priests, and Christian communities, and that, conscious of
the joy and responsibility of their vocation, consecrated religious be fully integrated into the
particular Church to which they belong, fostering communion and mutual cooperation”.
Lay faithful and the renewal of the Church
“The teaching of the Second Vatican Council on the unity of the Church as the People of God
gathered into the unity of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit stresses that Baptism confers
upon all who receive it a dignity which includes the imitation and following of Christ, communion
with one another and the missionary mandate”.  The lay faithful should thus be conscious of
their baptismal dignity. For their part, Pastors should have a profound respect “for the witness and
evangelizing work of lay people who, incorporated into the People of God through a spirituality of
communion, lead their brothers and sisters to encounter the living Jesus Christ. The renewal of the
Church in America will not be possible without the active presence of the laity. Therefore, they are
largely responsible for the future of the Church”.
There are two areas in which lay people live their vocation. The first, and the one best suited to
their lay state, is the secular world, which they are called to shape according to God's will.
“Their specific activity brings the Gospel to the structures of the world; 'working in holiness
wherever they are, they consecrate the world itself to God'”.  Thanks to the lay faithful, “the
presence and mission of the Church in the world is realized in a special way in the variety of
charisms and ministries which belong to the laity. Secularity is the true and distinctive mark of the
lay person and of lay spirituality, which means that the laity strive to evangelize the various sectors
of family, social, professional, cultural and political life. On a continent marked by competition and
aggressiveness, unbridled consumerism and corruption, lay people are called to embody deeply
evangelical values such as mercy, forgiveness, honesty, transparency of heart and patience in
difficult situations. What is expected from the laity is a great creative effort in activities and works
demonstrating a life in harmony with the Gospel”.
America needs lay Christians able to assume roles of leadership in society. It is urgent to train
men and women who, in keeping with their vocation, can influence public life, and direct it to the
common good. In political life, understood in its truest and noblest sense as the administration of
the common good, they can find the path of their own sanctification. For this, they must be formed
in the truths and values of the Church's social teaching, and in the basic notions of a theology of
the laity. A deeper knowledge of Christian ethical principles and moral values will enable them to
be exponents of these in their own particular setting, proclaiming them even where appeals are
made to the so-called “neutrality of the State”.
There is a second area in which many lay faithful are called to work, and this can be called “intra
ecclesial”. A good number of lay people in America legitimately aspire to contribute their talents
and charisms “to the building of the ecclesial community as delegates of the word, catechists,
visitors to the sick and the imprisoned, group leaders, etc.”  The Synod Fathers expressed
the hope that the Church would recognize some of these works as lay ministries, with a basis in
the Sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation, without compromising the specific ministries proper
to the Sacrament of Orders. This is a large and complex issue and some time ago I established a
Commission to study it;  in this regard the offices of the Holy See have from time to time
provided guidelines.  There is a need to promote positive cooperation by properly trained lay
men and women in different activities within the Church, while avoiding any confusion with the
ordained ministries and the activities proper to the Sacrament of Orders, so that the common
priesthood of the faithful remains clearly distinguished from that of the ordained.
In this respect, the Synod Fathers recommended that the works entrusted to lay people be clearly
“distinct from those which constitute steps on the way to the ordained ministry”  and which
are carried out by candidates for the priesthood before ordination. It was also noted that these lay
works “should be undertaken only by men and women who have received the necessary training
in accordance with clearly defined criteria: a stable presence, a real readiness to serve a
determined group of persons, and the duty of accountability to their Pastor”.  In any event,
while the intra-ecclesial apostolate of lay people needs to be promoted, care must be taken to
ensure that it goes hand in hand with the activity proper to the laity, in which their place cannot be
taken by priests: the area of temporal realities.
The dignity of women
Particular attention needs to be given to the vocation of women. On other occasions I have
expressed my esteem for the specific contribution of women to the progress of humanity and
recognized the legitimacy of their aspiration to take part fully in ecclesial, cultural, social and
economic life.  Without this contribution, we would miss the enrichment which only the
“feminine genius”  can bring to the life of the Church and to society. To fail to recognize this
would be an historic injustice, especially in America, if we consider the contribution which women
have made to the material and cultural development of the continent, just as they have in handing
down and preserving the faith. Indeed, “their role was decisive, above all in consecrated life, in
education and in health care”.
Unfortunately, in many parts of America women still meet forms of discrimination. It can be said
that the face of the poor in America is also the face of many women. That is why the Synod
Fathers spoke of a “feminine side of poverty”.  The Church feels the duty to defend the
human dignity which belongs to every person, and “denounces discrimination, sexual abuse and
male domination as actions contrary to God's plan”.  In particular, the Church deplores the
appalling practice, sometimes part of a larger plan, of the sterilization of women, especially the
poorest and most marginalized, often carried out surreptitiously, without the women themselves
realizing it. This is all the more serious when it is done in order to obtain economic aid at the
international level.
The Church throughout America feels committed to show greater concern for women and to
defend them “so that society in America can better support family life based on marriage, better
protect motherhood and show greater respect for the dignity of all women”.  There is a need
to help women in America to take an active and responsible role in the Church's life and mission,
 and also to acknowledge the need for the wisdom and cooperation of women in leadership
roles within American society.
Challenges facing Christian families
“God the Creator, by forming the first man and woman and commanding them to 'be fruitful
and multiply', definitively established the family. In this sanctuary life is born and is
welcomed as God's gift. The word of God, faithfully read in the family, gradually builds it up as a
domestic church and makes it fruitful in human and Christian virtues; it is there that the source of
vocations is to be found. Marian devotion, nourished by prayer, will keep families united and
prayerful with Mary, like the disciples of Jesus before Pentecost ”.  Many
insidious forces are endangering the solidity of the institution of the family in most countries of
America, and these represent so many challenges for Christians. Among them we should mention
the increase in divorce, the spread of abortion, infanticide and the contraceptive mentality. Faced
with this situation, we need to reaffirm “that the foundation of human life is the conjugal
relationship between husband and wife, a relationship which, between Christians, is sacramental”.
Hence there is urgent need of a broad catechetical effort regarding the Christian ideal of conjugal
communion and family life, including a spirituality of fatherhood and motherhood. Greater pastoral
attention must be given to the role of men as husbands and fathers, as well as to the responsibility
which they share with their wives for their marriage, the family and the raising of their children.
Also required is a serious preparation of young people for marriage, one which clearly presents
Catholic teaching on this sacrament at the theological, anthropological and spiritual levels. On a
continent like America, characterized by significant population growth, there needs to be a
constant increase of pastoral initiatives directed to families.
In order to be a true “domestic church”  the Christian family needs to be a setting in which
parents hand down the faith, since they are “for their children, by word and example, the first
heralds of the faith”.  Families should not fail to set time aside for prayer, in which spouses
are united with each other and with their children. There is a need to encourage shared spiritual
moments such as participating in the Eucharist on Sundays and Holy Days, receiving the
Sacrament of Reconciliation, daily prayer in the family and practical signs of charity. This will
strengthen fidelity in marriage and unity in families. In such a family setting it will not be difficult for
children to discover a vocation of service in the community and the Church, and to learn,
especially by seeing the example of their parents, that family life is a way to realize the universal
call to holiness.
Young people, the hope of the future
Young people are a great force in society and for evangelization. They “represent quite a large
part of the population in many nations of America. On their encounter with the living Christ
depends the hope and expectation of a future of greater communion and solidarity for the Church
and society in America”.  The particular Churches throughout the continent are clearly
making real efforts to catechize young people before Confirmation and to offer them other kinds of
support in developing their relationship with Christ and their knowledge of the Gospel. The
formation process for young people must be constant and active, capable of helping them to find
their place in the Church and in the world. Consequently, youth ministry must be one of the
primary concerns of Pastors and communities.
In fact, while many young people in America are searching for true meaning in life and are thirsting
for God, quite often they lack the conditions needed to take advantage of their abilities and realize
their aspirations. Unfortunately, unemployment and the lack of prospects for the future lead them
at times to withdrawal and to violence. The resulting sense of frustration not infrequently leads
them to abandon the search for God. Faced with this complex situation, “the Church is committed
to maintaining her pastoral and missionary commitment to young people, so that they will
encounter today the living Jesus Christ”.
In her pastoral activity the Church reaches a great number of adolescents and young people
through programs for Christian families, catechesis, Catholic educational institutions and
community life in parishes. But there are many others, especially among those affected by various
kinds of poverty, who remain outside the range of the Church's activity. Young Christians, trained
to have a mature missionary consciousness, must become apostles to their contemporaries.
There is need for pastoral outreach to young people wherever they are found: in schools,
universities, the workplace, the countryside, with appropriate adaptation to their particular
inclinations. At the parish and diocesan level it would be helpful also to develop a pastoral
outreach that takes account of the changing world of young people. Such an effort should seek to
engage them in dialogue, take advantage of favorable occasions for meetings on a larger scale,
encourage local initiatives and make the most of programs already in place at the interdiocesan
and international levels.
And what of those young people who do not grow out of their adolescent attitudes and find it
difficult to take on serious and lasting responsibilities? In response to this lack of maturity, young
people need to be invited to have courage and they need to be trained to appreciate the value of
life-long commitments such as the priesthood, consecrated life and Christian married life.
Leading children to encounter Christ
Children are God's gift and a sign of his presence. “There is a need to accompany children in
their encounter with Christ, from Baptism to First Communion, since they are part of the living
community of faith, hope and love”.  The Church is grateful for the efforts of parents,
teachers, pastoral, social and health care workers, and all those who seek to serve the family and
children with the same attitude as Jesus Christ who said: “Let the children come to me, and do not
hinder them; for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven”.
The Synod Fathers rightly deplored and condemned the painful condition of many children
throughout America who are denied their dignity, their innocence and even their life. “This
condition includes violence, poverty, homelessness, lack of adequate health care and education,
the harm inflicted by drugs and alcohol, and other states of neglect and abuse”.  In this
regard, special mention was made during the Synod of the problem of the sexual abuse of children
and child prostitution, and the Fathers made an urgent appeal “to all those holding authority in
society, that, as a priority, they do all in their power to alleviate the suffering of children in
America”.
Elements of communion with other Christian Churches and Ecclesial Communities
Between the Catholic Church and the other Christian Churches and Ecclesial Communities
there exists a drive towards communion rooted in the Baptism which each administers.  It is a
drive nourished by prayer, dialogue and joint action. The Synod Fathers wished to express their
special desire “to cooperate in the dialogue already under way with the Orthodox Church, with
which we share many elements of faith, sacramental life and piety”.  The specific proposals
of the Synodal assembly concerning non-Catholic Christian Churches and Ecclesial Communities
as a whole were numerous. It was suggested in the first place “that Catholic Christians, Pastors
and faithful foster cooperation between Christians of the different confessions, in the name of the
Gospel, in response to the cry of the poor, by the promotion of justice, by common prayer for unity
and by sharing in the word of God and the experience of faith in the living Christ”.  Also to be
promoted, when possible and appropriate, are meetings of experts from the different Churches
and Ecclesial Communities aimed at facilitating ecumenical dialogue. Ecumenism should be a
subject of reflection and shared experience between the different Catholic Episcopal Conferences
in America.
Although the Second Vatican Council refers to all those who are baptized and believe in Christ as
“brothers and sisters in the Lord”,  it is necessary to distinguish clearly between Christian
communities, with which ecumenical relations can be established, and sects, cults and other
pseudo-religious movements.
The Church's relations with Jewish communities
American society also includes Jewish communities, with which the Church has fostered
increasing cooperation in recent years.  The history of salvation makes clear our special
relationship with the Jewish people. Jesus belongs to the Jewish people and he inaugurated his
Church within the Jewish nation. A great part of the Holy Scriptures, which we Christians read as
the word of God, constitute a spiritual patrimony which we share with Jews.  Consequently
any negative attitude in their regard must be avoided, since “in order to be a blessing for the world,
Jews and Christians need first to be a blessing for each other”.
Non-Christian religions
As for non-Christian religions, the Catholic Church rejects nothing in them which is true and
holy.  Hence, with regard to other religions Catholics intend to emphasize elements of truth
wherever they are to be found, while at the same time firmly bearing witness to the newness of the
revelation of Christ, preserved in its fullness by the Church.  Consistent with this attitude,
they reject as alien to the spirit of Christ any discrimination or persecution directed against persons
on the basis of race, color, condition of life or religion. Difference of religion must never be a cause
of violence or war. Instead persons of different beliefs must feel themselves drawn, precisely
because of these beliefs, to work together for peace and justice.
“Muslims, like Christians and Jews, call Abraham their father. Consequently throughout America
these three communities should live in harmony and work together for the common good. The
Church in America must also work for greater mutual respect and good relations with the native
American religions”.  A similar attitude should be fostered with regard to the followers of
Hinduism, Buddhism and other religions who have come to America as a result of recent waves of
immigration from the East.
THE PATH TO SOLIDARITY
“By this all will know that you are my disciples,
if you have love for one another”
Solidarity, the fruit of communion
“Truly, I say to you, as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren, you did it to me”.
The awareness of communion with Christ and with our brothers and sisters, for
its part the fruit of conversion, leads to the service of our neighbors in all their needs, material and
spiritual, since the face of Christ shines forth in every human being. “Solidarity is thus the fruit of
the communion which is grounded in the mystery of the triune God, and in the Son of God who
took flesh and died for all. It is expressed in Christian love which seeks the good of others,
especially of those most in need”.
For the particular Churches of the American continent, this is the source of a commitment to
reciprocal solidarity and the sharing of the spiritual gifts and material goods with which God has
blessed them, fostering in individuals a readiness to work where they are needed. Taking the
Gospel as its starting-point, a culture of solidarity needs to be promoted, capable of inspiring
timely initiatives in support of the poor and the outcast, especially refugees forced to leave their
villages and lands in order to flee violence. The Church in America must encourage the
international agencies of the continent to establish an economic order dominated not only by the
profit motive but also by the pursuit of the common good of nations and of the international
community, the equitable distribution of goods and the integral development of peoples.
The Church's teaching, a statement of the demands of conversion
At a time when in the sphere of morality there is a disturbing spread of relativism and
subjectivism, the Church in America is called to proclaim with renewed vigor that conversion
consists in commitment to the person of Jesus Christ, with all the theological and moral
implications taught by the Magisterium of the Church. There is a need to recognize “the role
played by theologians, catechists and religion teachers who, by setting forth the Church's teaching
in fidelity to the Magisterium, cooperate directly in the correct formation of the consciences of the
faithful”.  If we believe that Jesus is the Truth, we cannot fail to desire ardently to
be his witnesses in order to bring our brothers and sisters closer to the full truth that dwells in the
Son of God made man, who died and rose from the dead for the salvation of the human race. “In
this way we will be able to be, in this world, living beacons of faith, hope and charity”.
The Church's social doctrine
Faced with the grave social problems which, with different characteristics, are present
throughout America, Catholics know that they can find in the Church's social doctrine an answer
which serves as a starting-point in the search for practical solutions. Spreading this doctrine is an
authentic pastoral priority. It is therefore important “that in America the agents of evangelization
(Bishops, priests, teachers, pastoral workers, etc.) make their own this treasure which is the
Church's social teaching and, inspired by it, become capable of interpreting the present situation
and determine the actions to take”.  In this regard, special care must be taken to train lay
persons capable of working, on the basis of their faith in Christ, to transform earthly realities. In
addition, it will help to promote and support the study of this doctrine in every area of the life of the
particular Churches in America, especially in the universities, so that it may be more deeply known
and applied to American society. The complex social reality of the continent is a fruitful field for the
analysis and application of the universal principles contained in this doctrine.
To this end, it would be very useful to have a compendium or approved synthesis of Catholic
social doctrine, including a “Catechism”, which would show the connection between it and the new
evangelization. The part which the Catechism of the Catholic Church devotes to this material, in its
treatment of the seventh commandment of the Decalogue, could serve as the starting-point for
such a “Catechism of Catholic Social Doctrine”. Naturally, as in the case of the Catechism of the
Catholic Church, such a synthesis would only formulate general principles, leaving their
application to further treatment of the specific issues bound up with the different local situations.
An important place in the Church's social doctrine belongs to the right to dignified labor.
Consequently, given the high rates of unemployment found in numerous countries in America and
the harsh conditions in which many industrial and rural workers find themselves, “it is necessary to
value work as a factor of the fulfillment and dignity of the human person. It is the ethical
responsibility of an organized society to promote and support a culture of work”.
The globalization of solidarity
As I mentioned earlier, the complex phenomenon of globalization is one of the features of the
contemporary world particularly visible in America. An important part of this many-faceted reality is
the economic aspect. By her social doctrine the Church makes an effective contribution to the
issues presented by the current globalized economy. Her moral vision in this area “rests on the
threefold cornerstone of human dignity, solidarity and subsidiarity”.  The globalized economy
must be analyzed in the light of the principles of social justice, respecting the preferential option for
the poor who must be allowed to take their place in such an economy, and the requirements of the
international common good. For “the Church's social doctrine is a moral vision which aims to
encourage governments, institutions and private organizations to shape a future consonant with
the dignity of every person. Within this perspective it is possible to examine questions of external
debt, internal political corruption and discrimination both within and between nations”.
The Church in America is called not only to promote greater integration between nations, thus
helping to create an authentic globalized culture of solidarity,  but also to cooperate with
every legitimate means in reducing the negative effects of globalization, such as the domination of
the powerful over the weak, especially in the economic sphere, and the loss of the values of local
cultures in favor of a misconstrued homogenization.
Social sins which cry to heaven
The Church's social doctrine also makes possible a clearer appreciation of the gravity of the
“social sins which cry to heaven because they generate violence, disrupt peace and harmony
between communities within single nations, between nations and between the different regions of
the continent”.  Among these must be mentioned: “the drug trade, the recycling of illicit funds,
corruption at every level, the terror of violence, the arms race, racial discrimination, inequality
between social groups and the irrational destruction of nature”.  These sins are the sign of a
deep crisis caused by the loss of a sense of God and the absence of those moral principles which
should guide the life of every person. In the absence of moral points of reference, an unbridled
greed for wealth and power takes over, obscuring any Gospel-based vision of social reality.
Not infrequently, this leads some public institutions to ignore the actual social climate. More and
more, in many countries of America, a system known as “neoliberalism” prevails; based on a
purely economic conception of man, this system considers profit and the law of the market as its
only parameters, to the detriment of the dignity of and the respect due to individuals and peoples.
At times this system has become the ideological justification for certain attitudes and behavior in
the social and political spheres leading to the neglect of the weaker members of society. Indeed,
the poor are becoming ever more numerous, victims of specific policies and structures which are
often unjust.
On the basis of the Gospel, the best response to this tragic situation is the promotion of solidarity
and peace, with a view to achieving real justice. For this to happen, encouragement and support
must be given to all those who are examples of honesty in the administration of public finances
and of justice. So too there is a need to support the process of democratization presently taking
place in America,  since a democratic system provides greater control over potential abuses.
“The rule of law is the necessary condition for the establishment of an authentic democracy”.
For democracy to develop, there is a need for civic education and the promotion of public order
and peace. In effect, “there is no authentic and stable democracy without social justice. Thus the
Church needs to pay greater attention to the formation of consciences, which will prepare the
leaders of society for public life at all levels, promote civic education, respect for law and for
human rights, and inspire greater efforts in the ethical training of political leaders”.
The ultimate foundation of human rights
It is appropriate to recall that the foundation on which all human rights rest is the dignity of the
person. “God's masterpiece, man, is made in the divine image and likeness. Jesus took on our
human nature, except for sin; he advanced and defended the dignity of every human person,
without exception; he died that all might be free. The Gospel shows us how Christ insisted on the
centrality of the human person in the natural order  and in the social and religious
orders, even against the claims of the Law : defending men, women  and
even children, who in his time and culture occupied an inferior place in society.
The human being's dignity as a child of God is the source of human rights and of corresponding
duties”.  For this reason, “every offense against the dignity of man is an offense against God
himself, in whose image man is made”.  This dignity is common to all, without exception,
since all have been created in the image of God. Jesus' answer to the question
“Who is my neighbor?”  demands of each individual an attitude of respect for the dignity
of others and of real concern for them, even if they are strangers or enemies. In
all parts of America the awareness that human rights must be respected has increased in recent
times, yet much still remains to be done, if we consider the violations of the rights of persons and
groups still taking place on the continent.
Preferential love for the poor and the outcast
“The Church in America must incarnate in her pastoral initiatives the solidarity of the universal
Church towards the poor and the outcast of every kind. Her attitude needs to be one of assistance,
promotion, liberation and fraternal openness. The goal of the Church is to ensure that no one is
marginalized”.  The memory of the dark chapters of America's history, involving the practice
of slavery and other situations of social discrimination, must awaken a sincere desire for
conversion leading to reconciliation and communion.
Concern for those most in need springs from a decision to love the poor in a special manner. This
is a love which is not exclusive and thus cannot be interpreted as a sign of partiality or
sectarianism;  in loving the poor the Christian imitates the attitude of the Lord, who during his
earthly life devoted himself with special compassion to all those in spiritual and material need.
The Church's work on behalf of the poor in every part of America is important; yet efforts are still
needed to make this line of pastoral activity increasingly directed to an encounter with Christ who,
though rich, made himself poor for our sakes, that he might enrich us by his poverty.
There is a need to intensify and broaden what is already being done in this area, with the goal of
reaching as many of the poor as possible. Sacred Scripture reminds us that God hears the cry of
the poor  and the Church must heed the cry of those most in need. Hearing their
voice, “she must live with the poor and share their distress. By her lifestyle her priorities, her words
and her actions, she must testify that she is in communion and solidarity with them”.
Foreign debt
The existence of a foreign debt which is suffocating quite a few countries of the American
continent represents a complex problem. While not entering into its many aspects, the Church in
her pastoral concern cannot ignore this difficult situation, since it touches the life of so many
people. For this reason, different Episcopal Conferences in America, conscious of the gravity of
the question, have organized study meetings on the subject and have published documents aimed
at pointing out workable solutions.  I too have frequently expressed my concern about this
situation, which in some cases has become unbearable. In light of the imminent Great Jubilee of
the Year 2000, and recalling the social significance that Jubilees had in the Old Testament, I
wrote: “In the spirit of the Book of Leviticus , Christians will have to raise their voice on
behalf of all the poor of the world, proposing the Jubilee as an appropriate time to give thought,
among other things, to reducing substantially, if not cancelling outright, the international debt
which seriously threatens the future of many nations”.
Once more I express the hope, which the Synod Fathers made their own, that the Pontifical
Council for Justice and Peace together with other competent agencies, such as the Section for
Relations with States of the Secretariat of State, “through study and dialogue with representatives
of the First World and with the leaders of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, will
seek ways of resolving the problem of the foreign debt and produce guidelines that would prevent
similar situations from recurring on the occasion of future loans”.  On the broadest level
possible, it would be helpful if “internationally known experts in economics and monetary questions
would undertake a critical analysis of the world economic order, in its positive and negative
aspects, so as to correct the present order, and that they would propose a system and
mechanisms capable of ensuring an integral and concerted development of individuals and
peoples”.
The fight against corruption
In America too, the phenomenon of corruption is widespread. The Church can effectively help
to eradicate this evil from civil society by “the greater involvement of competent Christian laity who,
thanks to their training in the family, at school and in the parish, foster the practice of values such
as truth, honesty, industriousness and the service of the common good”.  In order to attain
this goal, and to offer enlightenment to all people of good will anxious to put an end to the evils
resulting from corruption, there is a need to teach and make known as widely as possible the
passages of the Catechism of the Catholic Church devoted to this subject, while making Catholics
in the different nations better acquainted with the relevant documents published by Episcopal
Conferences in other countries.  With such training, Christians will contribute significantly to
resolving the problem of corruption, committing themselves to put into practice the Church's social
doctrine in all matters affecting their lives and in those areas where they can be of help to others.
The drug problem
With regard to the serious problem of the drug trade, the Church in America can cooperate
effectively with national and business leaders, non-governmental organizations and international
agencies in developing projects aimed at doing away with this trade which threatens the well-being
of the peoples of America.  This cooperation must be extended to legislative bodies, in
support of initiatives to prevent the “recycling of funds”, foster control of the assets of those
involved in this traffic, and ensure that the production and marketing of the chemical substances
from which drugs are obtained are carried out according to the law. The urgency and the gravity of
the problem make it imperative to call upon the various sectors and groups within civil society to
be united in the fight against the drug trade.  Specifically, as far as the Bishops are
concerned, it is necessary — as the Synod Fathers suggested — that they themselves, as Pastors
of the People of God, courageously and forcefully condemn the hedonism, materialism and life
styles which easily lead to drug use.
There is also a need to help poor farmers from being tempted by the easy money gained from
cultivating plants used for drug-production. In this regard international agencies can make a
valuable contribution to governments by providing incentives to encourage the production of
alternative crops. Encouragement must also be given to those involved in rehabilitating drug users
and to those engaged in the pastoral care of the victims of drug dependence. It is fundamentally
important to offer the proper “meaning of life” to young people who, when faced with a lack of such
meaning, not infrequently find themselves caught in the destructive spiral of drugs. Experience
shows that this work of recuperation and social rehabilitation can be an authentic commitment to
evangelization.
The arms race
One factor seriously paralyzing the progress of many nations in America is the arms race. The
particular Churches in America must raise a prophetic voice to condemn the arms race and the
scandalous arms trade, which consumes huge sums of money which should instead be used to
combat poverty and promote development.  On the other hand, the stockpiling of weapons is
a cause of instability and a threat to peace.  For this reason the Church remains vigilant in
situations where these is a risk of armed conflict, even between sister nations. As a sign and
instrument of reconciliation and peace, she must seek “by every means possible, including
mediation and arbitration, to act in favor of peace and fraternity between peoples”.
The culture of death and a society dominated by the powerful
Nowadays, in America as elsewhere in the world, a model of society appears to be emerging
in which the powerful predominate, setting aside and even eliminating the powerless: I am thinking
here of unborn children, helpless victims of abortion; the elderly and incurably ill, subjected at
times to euthanasia; and the many other people relegated to the margins of society by
consumerism and materialism. Nor can I fail to mention the unnecessary recourse to the death
penalty when other “bloodless means are sufficient to defend human lives against an aggressor
and to protect public order and the safety of persons. Today, given the means at the State's
disposal to deal with crime and control those who commit it, without abandoning all hope of their
redemption, the cases where it is absolutely necessary to do away with an offender 'are now very
rare, even non-existent practically'”.  This model of society bears the stamp of the culture of
death, and is therefore in opposition to the Gospel message. Faced with this distressing reality,
the Church community intends to commit itself all the more to the defense of the culture of life.
In this regard, the Synod Fathers, echoing recent documents of the Church's Magisterium,
forcefully restated their unconditional respect for and total dedication to human life from the
moment of conception to that of natural death, and their condemnation of evils like abortion and
euthanasia. If the teachings of the divine and natural law are to be upheld, it is essential to
promote knowledge of the Church's social doctrine and to work so that the values of life and family
are recognized and defended in social customs and in State ordinances.  As well as
protecting life, greater efforts should be made, through a variety of pastoral initiatives, to promote
adoptions and to provide continuing assistance to women with problem pregnancies, both before
and after the birth of the child. Special pastoral attention must also be given to women who have
undergone or actively procured an abortion.
How can we fail to thank God and express genuine appreciation to our brothers and sisters in the
faith throughout America who are committed, along with other Christians and countless individuals
of good will, to defending life by every legal means and to protecting the unborn, the incurably ill
and the handicapped? Their work is all the more praiseworthy if we consider the indifference of so
many people, the threats posed by eugenics and the assaults on life and human dignity
perpetrated everywhere each day.
This same concern must be shown to the elderly, who are often neglected and left to fend for
themselves. They must be respected as persons; it is important to care for them and to help them
in ways which will promote their rights and ensure their greatest possible physical and spiritual
well-being. The elderly must be protected from situations or pressures which could drive them to
suicide; in particular they must be helped nowadays to resist the temptation of assisted suicide
and euthanasia.
Together with the Pastors of the People of God in America, I appeal to “Catholics working in the
field of medicine and health care, to those holding public office or engaged in teaching, to make
every effort to defend those lives most at risk, and to act with a conscience correctly formed in
accordance with Catholic doctrine. Here Bishops and priests have a special responsibility to bear
tireless witness to the Gospel of life and to exhort the faithful to act accordingly”.  At the same
time, it is essential for the Church in America to take appropriate measures to influence the
deliberations of legislative assemblies, encouraging citizens, both Catholics and other people of
good will, to establish organizations to propose workable legislation and to resist measures which
endanger the two inseparable realities of life and the family. Nowadays there is a special need to
pay attention to questions related to prenatal diagnosis, in order to avoid any violation of human
dignity.
Discrimination against indigenous peoples and Americans of African descent
If the Church in America, in fidelity to the Gospel of Christ, intends to walk the path of
solidarity, she must devote special attention to those ethnic groups which even today experience
discrimination. Every attempt to marginalize the indigenous peoples must be eliminated. This
means, first of all, respecting their territories and the pacts made with them; likewise, efforts must
be made to satisfy their legitimate social, health and cultural requirements. And how can we
overlook the need for reconciliation between the indigenous peoples and the societies in which
they are living?
Here I would like to mention that in some places Americans of African descent still suffer from
ethnic prejudice, and this represents a serious obstacle to their encounter with Christ. Since all
people, whatever their race or condition, have been created by God in his image, it is necessary to
encourage concrete programs, in which common prayer must play a part, aimed at promoting
understanding and reconciliation between different peoples. These can build bridges of Christian
love, peace and justice between all men and women.
In order to attain these goals it is essential to train competent pastoral workers capable of
employing methods already legitimately “inculturated” in catechesis and the liturgy, avoiding a
syncretism which gives only a partial account of true Christian doctrine. Then too, it will be easier
to provide a sufficient number of pastors to work with the native peoples if efforts are made to
promote priestly and religious vocations within the midst of these very people.
The question of immigrants
In its history, America has experienced many immigrations, as waves of men and women
came to its various regions in the hope of a better future. The phenomenon continues even today,
especially with many people and families from Latin American countries who have moved to the
northern parts of the continent, to the point where in some cases they constitute a substantial part
of the population. They often bring with them a cultural and religious heritage which is rich in
Christian elements. The Church is well aware of the problems created by this situation and is
committed to spare no effort in developing her own pastoral strategy among these immigrant
people, in order to help them settle in their new land and to foster a welcoming attitude among the
local population, in the belief that a mutual openness will bring enrichment to all.
Church communities will not fail to see in this phenomenon a specific call to live an evangelical
fraternity and at the same time a summons to strengthen their own religious spirit with a view to a
more penetrating evangelization. With this in mind, the Synod Fathers recalled that “the Church in
America must be a vigilant advocate, defending against any unjust restriction the natural right of
individual persons to move freely within their own nation and from one nation to another. Attention
must be called to the rights of migrants and their families and to respect for their human dignity,
even in cases of non-legal immigration”.
Migrants should be met with a hospitable and welcoming attitude which can encourage them to
become part of the Church's life, always with due regard for their freedom and their specific
cultural identity. Cooperation between the dioceses from which they come and those in which they
settle, also through specific pastoral structures provided for in the legislation and praxis of the
Church,  has proved extremely beneficial to this end. In this way the most adequate and
complete pastoral care possible can be ensured. The Church in America must be constantly
concerned to provide for the effective evangelization of those recent arrivals who do not yet know
Christ.
I
THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH
IN AMERICA TODAY:
THE NEW EVANGELIZATION
“As the Father has sent me, even so I send you”
Sent by Christ
The Risen Christ, before his Ascension into heaven, sent the Apostles to preach the Gospel to
the whole world  and conferred on them the powers needed to carry out this mission.
It is significant that, before giving his final missionary mandate, Jesus should speak of the
universal power he had received from the Father. In effect, Christ passed on to the
Apostles the mission which he had received from the Father, and in this way gave
them a share in his powers.
Yet “the lay faithful too, precisely as members of the Church, have the vocation and mission of
proclaiming the Gospel: they are prepared for this work by the sacraments of Christian initiation
and by the gifts of the Holy Spirit”.  They have been “in their own way made sharers in the
priestly, prophetic and kingly functions of Christ”.  Consequently, “the lay faithful, in virtue of
their participation in the prophetic mission of Christ, are fully part of this work of the Church”
and so should feel called and encouraged to proclaim the Good News of the Kingdom. Jesus'
words: “You too, go into the vineyard”,  must be seen as addressed not only to the
Apostles but to all who desire to be authentic disciples of the Lord.
The basic task for which Jesus sends out his disciples is the proclamation of the Good News, that
is, evangelization. Consequently, “to evangelize is the grace and vocation proper
to the Church, her most profound identity”.  As I have said on other occasions, the new and
unique situation in which the world and the Church find themselves at the threshold of the Third
Millennium, and the urgent needs which result, mean that the mission of evangelization today calls
for a new program which can be defined overall as a “new evangelization”.  As the Church's
Supreme Pastor, I urgently desire to encourage all the members of God's People, particularly
those living in America — where I first appealed for a commitment “new in its ardor, methods and
expression”  — to take up this project and to cooperate in carrying it out. In accepting this
mission, everyone should keep in mind that the vital core of the new evangelization must be a
clear and unequivocal proclamation of the person of Jesus Christ, that is, the preaching of his
name, his teaching, his life, his promises and the Kingdom which he has gained for us by his
Paschal Mystery.
Jesus Christ, the “good news” and the prime evangelizer
Jesus Christ is the “good news” of salvation made known to people yesterday, today and for
ever; but he is also the first and greatest evangelizer.  The Church must make the crucified
and risen Christ the center of her pastoral concern and her evangelizing activity. “Everything
planned in the Church must have Christ and his Gospel as its starting-point”.  Therefore, “the
Church in America must speak increasingly of Jesus Christ, the human face of God and the divine
face of man. It is this proclamation that truly makes an impact on people, awakens and transforms
hearts, in a word, converts. Christ must be proclaimed with joy and conviction, but above all by the
witness of each one's life”.
Individual Christians will be able to carry out their mission effectively to the extent that they make
the life of the Son of God made man the perfect model for their work of spreading the Gospel. The
simplicity of his manner and his choices must be normative for everyone in the work of
evangelization. In this perspective, the poor will certainly be considered among the first to be
evangelized, following the example of Christ, who said of himself: “The Spirit of the Lord... has
anointed me to preach good news to the poor”.
As I have already noted, love for the poor must be preferential, but not exclusive. The Synod
Fathers observed that it was in part because of an approach to the pastoral care of the poor
marked by a certain exclusiveness that the pastoral care for the leading sectors of society has
been neglected and many people have thus been estranged from the Church.  The damage
done by the spread of secularism in these sectors — political or economic, union-related, military,
social or cultural — shows how urgent it is that they be evangelized, with the encouragement and
guidance of the Church's Pastors, who are called by God to care for everyone. They will be able to
count on the help of those who — fortunately still numerous — have remained faithful to Christian
values. In this regard the Synod Fathers have recognized “the commitment of many leaders to
building a just and fraternal society”.  With their support, Pastors will face the not easy task of
evangelizing these sectors of society. With renewed fervor and updated methods, they will
announce Christ to leaders, men and women alike, insisting especially on the formation of
consciences on the basis of the Church's social doctrine. This formation will act as the best
antidote to the not infrequent cases of inconsistency and even corruption marking socio-political
structures. Conversely, if this evangelization of the leadership sector is neglected, it should not
come as a surprise that many who are a part of it will be guided by criteria alien to the Gospel and
at times openly contrary to it.
The encounter with Christ spurs evangelization
An encounter with the Lord brings about a profound transformation in all who do not close
themselves off from him. The first impulse coming from this transformation is to communicate to
others the richness discovered in the experience of the encounter. This does not mean simply
teaching what we have come to know but also, like the Samaritan woman, enabling others to
encounter Jesus personally: “Come and see”. The result will be the same as that which
took place in the heart of the Samaritans, who said to the woman: “It is no longer because of your
words that we believe, for we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the Savior
of the world”. The Church, which draws her life from the permanent and mysterious
presence of her Risen Lord, has as the core of her mission a duty “to lead all people to encounter
Christ”.
She is called to proclaim that Christ is indeed the Living One, the Son of God, who became man,
died and rose again. He alone is the Savior of every person and of the whole person; as the Lord
of history, he is constantly at work in the Church and in the world through his Spirit, until the end of
time. This presence of the Risen One in the Church makes it possible for us to encounter him,
thanks to the invisible working of his life-giving Spirit. This encounter takes place in the faith
received from and lived in the Church, the Mystical Body of Christ. The encounter with Christ then
has an essentially ecclesial dimension, and it leads to a life commitment. Indeed, “to encounter the
living Christ means to accept the love by which he loves us first, to choose him, to adhere freely to
his person and his plan, which consists in proclaiming and in bringing about the Kingdom of God”.
The calling gives rise to a search for Jesus: “'Rabbi' (which means Teacher), 'where are you
staying'. He said to them: 'Come and see'. They came and saw where he was staying; and they
stayed that day with him”. This “staying” is not limited to the day of one's call, but
rather extends to the whole of life. To follow Jesus involves living as he lived, accepting his
message, adopting his way of thinking, embracing his destiny and sharing his project, which is the
plan of the Father: it involves inviting everyone to communion with the Trinity and to communion
among ourselves in a just and fraternal society”.  The burning desire to invite others to
encounter the One whom we have encountered is the start of the evangelizing mission to which
the whole Church is called. This mission has become particularly urgent today in America, five
hundred years after the first evangelization, as we prepare to commemorate with gratitude the two
thousandth anniversary of the coming of the only-begotten Son of God into the world.
The importance of catechesis
The new evangelization in which the whole continent is engaged means that faith cannot be
taken for granted, but must be explicitly proposed in all its breadth and richness. This is the
principal objective of catechesis, which, by its very nature, is an essential aspect of the new
evangelization. “Catechesis is a process of formation in faith, hope and charity; it shapes the mind
and touches the heart, leading the person to embrace Christ fully and completely. It introduces the
believer more fully into the experience of the Christian life, which involves the liturgical celebration
of the mystery of the Redemption and the Christian service of others”.
Well realizing the need for a complete catechesis, I made my own the proposal of the Fathers of
the 1985 Extraordinary Assembly of the Synod of Bishops to compose “a catechism or
compendium of all Catholic doctrine regarding both faith and morals”, which could serve as “a
point of reference for the catechisms or compendia that are prepared in the various regions”.
This proposal was implemented with the publication of the typical edition of the Catechismus
Catholicae Ecclesiae.  In addition to the text of the Catechism, and for a better utilization of
its contents, I intended that a General Directory for Catechesis should also be compiled and
published.  I heartily recommend the use of these two resources, of universal value, to
everyone involved in catechesis in America. It is to be hoped that both documents will be
employed “in the preparation and the evaluation of all parochial and diocesan programs of
catechesis, bearing in mind that the religious situation of young people and adults calls for a
catechesis which is more kerygmatic and more organic in its presentation of the contents of the
faith”.
It is necessary to acknowledge and encourage the outstanding work done by so many catechists
throughout America as authentic messengers of the kingdom: “Their faith and their witness of life
are an integral part of catechesis”.  I wish all the more to encourage the faithful to take up,
with commitment and love of the Lord, this service to the Church, generously offering their time
and their talents. Bishops for their part should be concerned that catechists receive appropriate
formation to enable them to carry out this task, so indispensable in the life of the Church.
In catechesis it will be useful to keep in mind, especially on a continent like America where the
social question takes on such importance, that “growth in the understanding of the faith and its
practical expression in social life are intimately connected. Efforts made to favor an encounter with
Christ cannot fail to have a positive repercussion in the promotion of the common good in a just
society”.
The evangelization of culture
My Predecessor Paul VI widely remarked that “the split between the Gospel and culture is
undoubtedly the drama of our time”.  Hence the Synod Fathers rightly felt that “the new
evangelization calls for a clearly conceived, serious and well organized effort to evangelize
culture”.  The Son of God, by taking upon himself our human nature, became incarnate within
a particular people, even though his redemptive death brought salvation to all people, of every
culture, race and condition. The gift of his Spirit and his love are meant for each and every people
and culture, in order to bring them all into unity after the example of the perfect unity existing in the
Triune God. For this to happen, it is necessary to inculturate preaching in such a way that the
Gospel is proclaimed in the language and in the culture of its hearers.  At the same time,
however, it must not be forgotten that the Paschal Mystery of Christ, the supreme manifestation of
the infinite God within the finitude of history, is the only valid point of reference for all of humanity
on its pilgrimage in search of authentic unity and true peace.
In America, the mestiza face of the Virgin of Guadalupe was from the start a symbol of the
inculturation of the Gospel, of which she has been the lodestar and the guide. Through her
powerful intercession, the Gospel will penetrate the hearts of the men and women of America and
permeate their cultures, transforming them from within.
Evangelizing centers of education
Education can play an outstanding role in promoting the inculturation of the Gospel.
Nonetheless, Catholic centers of education, and those which, although non-denominational, are
clearly inspired by Catholic principles, will be able to engage in authentic evangelization only if at
all levels — including that of the university — they clearly preserve their Catholic orientation. The
content of the education they impart should make constant reference to Jesus Christ and his
message as the Church presents it in her dogmatic and moral teaching. Only in this way will they
train truly Christian leaders in the different spheres of human activity, and in society, especially in
politics, economics, science, art and philosophical reflection.  Hence, “it is essential that the
Catholic university be truly both things at once: a university and Catholic. Its Catholic character is
an essential element of the university as an institution, and therefore does not depend simply on
the decision of the individuals who govern the university at any particular time”.  Pastoral
work in Catholic universities will therefore be given special attention: it must encourage a
commitment to the apostolate on the part of the students themselves, so that they can become the
evangelizers of the university world.  In addition, “cooperation between Catholic universities
throughout America needs to be encouraged, for their mutual enrichment”;  this will help put
into effect, at the university level too, the principle of solidarity and interchange between the
peoples of the whole continent.
Something similar must also be said about Catholic schools, particularly with regard to secondary
education: “A special effort should be made to strengthen the Catholic identity of schools, whose
specific character is based on an educational vision having its origin in the person of Christ and its
roots in the teachings of the Gospel. Catholic schools must seek not only to impart a quality
education from the technical and professional standpoint, but also and above all provide for the
integral formation of the human person.  Given the importance of the work done by Catholic
educators, I join the Synod Fathers in gratefully encouraging all those devoted to teaching in
Catholic schools — priests, consecrated men and women and committed lay people — “to
persevere in their most important mission”.  The influence of these educational centers
should extend to all sectors of society, without distinction or exclusion. It is essential that every
possible effort be made to ensure that Catholic schools, despite financial difficulties, continue to
provide “a Catholic education to the poor and the marginalized in society”.  It will never be
possible to free the needy from their poverty unless they are first freed from the impoverishment
arising from the lack of adequate education.
In the overall work of the new evangelization, the educational sector occupies a place of honor.
For this reason, the activity of all Catholic teachers, including those working in non-denominational
schools, should be encouraged. I also make an urgent appeal to men and women religious not to
abandon this field which is so important for the new evangelization.
As a fruit and an expression of the communion existing between all the particular Churches of
America, certainly strengthened by the spiritual experience of the Synodal Assembly, an effort
must be made to promote gatherings of Catholic educators at the national and continental levels,
in an attempt to coordinate and expand the educational apostolate in every context.
To carry out these tasks, the Church in America requires a degree of freedom in the field of
education; this is not to be seen as a privilege but as a right, in virtue of the evangelizing mission
entrusted to the Church by the Lord. Furthermore, parents have a fundamental and primary right
to make decisions about the education of their children; consequently, Catholic parents must be
able to choose an education in harmony with their religious convictions. The function of the State
in this area is subsidiary; the State has the duty “to ensure that education is available to all and to
respect and defend freedom of instruction. A State monopoly in this area must be condemned as a
form of totalitarianism which violates the fundamental rights which it ought to defend, especially
the right of parents to provide religious education for their children. The family is the place where
the education of the person primarily takes place”.
Evangelization through the media
For the new evangelization to be effective, it is essential to have a deep understanding of the
culture of our time in which the social communications media are most influential. Therefore,
knowledge and use of the media, whether the more traditional forms or those which technology
has produced in recent times, is indispensable. Contemporary reality demands a capacity to learn
the language, nature and characteristics of mass media. Using the media correctly and
competently can lead to a genuine inculturation of the Gospel. At the same time, the media also
help to shape the culture and mentality of people today, which is why there must be special
pastoral activity aimed at those working in the media.
On this point, the Synod Fathers suggested a range of concrete initiatives to make the Gospel
effectively present in the world of social communications: the training of pastoral workers for this
task; the support of high-quality production centers; the careful and effective use of satellite and
other new technologies; teaching the faithful to be “critical” in their use of the media; joining forces
in order to acquire and manage new transmitters and TV and radio networks, as well as
coordinating those already in operation. Catholic publications also deserve support and need to
develop the excellence sought by all.
Business people should be encouraged to provide economic support for quality products
promoting human and Christian values.  But a program as vast as this is far beyond the
resources of the individual particular Churches of the American continent. Therefore, the Synod
Fathers proposed an inter-American coordination of current activities in the field of social
communications, aimed at fostering mutual awareness and coordination of current projects in the
field.
The challenge of the sects
The proselytizing activity of the sects and new religious groups in many parts of America is a
grave hindrance to the work of evangelization. The word “proselytism” has a negative meaning
when it indicates a way of winning followers which does not respect the freedom of those to whom
a specific kind of religious propaganda is directed.  The Catholic Church in America is critical
of proselytism by the sects and, for this reason, rejects methods of this kind in her own
evangelizing work. Presenting the Gospel of Christ in its entirety, the work of evangelization must
respect the inner sanctuary of every individual's conscience, where the decisive and absolutely
personal dialogue between grace and human freedom unfolds.
This must be borne in mind especially with regard to the sisters and brothers of the Churches and
Ecclesial Communities separated from the Catholic Church, long-established in some regions. The
bonds of true though imperfect communion which, according to the teaching of the Second
Vatican Council,  these communities already have with the Catholic Church must enlighten
the attitudes of the Church and her members towards them.  These attitudes, however, must
not be such that they weaken the firm conviction that only in the Catholic Church is found the
fullness of the means of salvation established by Jesus Christ.
The success of proselytism by sects and new religious groups in America cannot be ignored. It
demands of the Church on the continent a thorough study, to be carried out in each nation and at
the international level, to ascertain why many Catholics leave the Church. Pastoral policies will
have to be revised, so that each particular Church can offer the faithful more personalized
religious care, strengthen the structures of communion and mission, make the most of the
evangelizing possibilities of a purified popular religiosity, and thus give new life to every Catholic's
faith in Jesus Christ, through prayer and meditation upon the word of God, suitably explained.
 No one can deny the urgency of prompt evangelizing efforts aimed at those segments of the
People of God most exposed to proselytism by the sects: immigrants, neighborhoods on the
outskirts of the cities or rural towns with no regular presence of a priest and therefore marked by
widespread religious ignorance, families of simple people suffering from material difficulties of
various kinds. From this point of view too, base-communities, movements, family groups and other
forms of association in which it is easier to build interpersonal bonds of mutual support, both
spiritual and economic, have shown themselves to be very helpful.
Moreover, as some of the Synod Fathers indicated, it is necessary to ask whether a pastoral
strategy directed almost exclusively to meeting people's material needs has not in the end left their
hunger for God unsatisfied, making them vulnerable to anything which claims to be of spiritual
benefit. Hence, “it is indispensable that all remain united to Christ by means of a joyful and
transforming kerygma, especially in liturgical preaching”.  A Church which fervently lives the
spiritual and contemplative dimension, and which gives herself generously to the service of
charity, will be an ever more eloquent witness to God for men and women searching for meaning
in their lives.  To this end, it is more necessary than ever for all the faithful to move from a
faith of habit, sustained perhaps by social context alone, to a faith which is conscious and
personally lived. The renewal of faith will always be the best way to lead others to the Truth that is
Christ.
For the response to the challenge of the sects to be effective, there is a need for an appropriate
coordination of initiatives among dioceses, aimed at bringing about a more effective cooperation
through shared projects which will produce better results.
The mission ad gentes
Jesus Christ entrusted to his Church the mission of evangelizing all nations: “Go therefore and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,
teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you”. There must always be a
dynamic awareness of the universality of the evangelizing mission which the Church has received,
as there has been consistently throughout the history of the pilgrim People of God in America.
Evangelization is most urgent among those on this continent who do not yet know the name of
Jesus, the only name given to men and women that they may be saved.
Unfortunately, the name of Jesus is unknown to a vast part of humanity and in many sectors of
American society. It is enough to think of the indigenous peoples not yet Christianized or of the
presence of non-Christian religions such as Islam, Buddhism or Hinduism, especially among
immigrants from Asia.
This obliges the Church in America to be involved in the mission ad gentes.  The program of
a new evangelization on the American continent, to which many pastoral projects are directed,
cannot be restricted to revitalizing the faith of regular believers, but must strive as well to proclaim
Christ where he is not known.
Likewise, the particular Churches in America are called to extend their missionary efforts beyond
the bounds of the continent. They cannot keep for themselves the immense riches of their
Christian heritage. They must take this heritage to the whole world and share it with those who do
not yet know it. Here it is a question of many millions of men and women who, without faith, suffer
the most serious kind of poverty. Faced with this poverty, it would be a mistake not to encourage
an evangelizing effort beyond the continent with the excuse that there is still much to do in
America or to wait until the Church in America reaches the point, basically utopian, of full maturity.
With the hope that the American continent, in accordance with its Christian vitality, will play its part
in the great task of the mission ad gentes, I make my own the practical proposals presented by the
Synod Fathers: “to maintain a greater cooperation between sister Churches; to send missionaries
(priests, religious and lay faithful) within the continent and abroad; to strengthen or create
missionary institutes; to encourage the missionary dimension of consecrated and contemplative
life; to give greater impetus to mission promotion, training and organization”.  I am sure that
the pastoral zeal of the Bishops and of the sons and daughters of the Church throughout America
will devise concrete plans, also at the international level, to implement with great dynamism and
creativity these missionary proposals.
CONCLUSION
With hope and gratitude
“I am with you always, to the end of the age”. Trusting in this promise of the Lord,
the pilgrim Church in America prepares enthusiastically to meet the challenges of today's world
and those that will come in the future. In the Gospel, the Good News of the Resurrection of the
Lord is accompanied by the invitation to fear not. The Church in America wishes
to walk in hope, as the Synod Fathers declared: “With serene trust in the Lord of history, the
Church prepares to cross the threshold of the Third Millennium freed from prejudice, hesitation,
selfishness, fear or doubt, and convinced of the fundamental and primary service which she must
provide as a testimony to her fidelity to God and to the men and women of the continent”.
Furthermore, the Church in America feels especially impelled to walk in faith, responding with
gratitude to the love of Jesus, “the merciful love of God made flesh ”.  The
celebration of the beginning of the Third Christian Millennium can be the right moment for the
People of God in America to renew “their thanks for the great gift of faith”,  which they first
received five centuries ago. The year 1492, beyond its historical and political meaning, was the
great year of grace when America welcomed the faith: a faith which proclaims the supreme gift of
the Incarnation of the Son of God two thousand years ago, and which we will solemnly
commemorate in the Great Jubilee now so close.
This twofold sense of hope and gratitude must accompany every pastoral action of the Church on
the continent, permeating with the spirit of the Jubilee the various initiatives in the dioceses,
parishes, religious communities, ecclesial movements, and the activities which will be organized at
both regional and continental levels.
Prayer to Jesus Christ for the families of America
I therefore invite all the Catholics of America to take an active part in the evangelizing
initiatives which the Holy Spirit is stirring in every part of this immense continent, so full of
resources and hopes for the future. In a special way, I invite Catholic families to be “domestic
Churches”,  in which the Christian faith is lived and passed on to the young as a treasure,
and where all pray together. If they live up to the ideal which God places before them, Catholic
homes will be true centers of evangelization.
In concluding this Apostolic Exhortation, in which I have taken up the proposals of the Synod
Fathers, I gladly welcome their suggestion to compose a prayer for the families of America.  I
invite individuals, communities and ecclesial groups, wherever two or more gather in the Lord's
name, to strengthen through prayer the spiritual bond between all American Catholics. Let
everyone join in the prayer of the Successor of Peter, invoking Christ who is “the way of
conversion, communion and solidarity in America”:
W e thank you, Lord Jesus,
because the Gospel of the Father's love,
with which you came to save the world,
has been proclaimed far and wide in America
as a gift of the Holy Spirit
that fills us with gladness. We thank you for the gift of your Life,
which you have given us by loving us to the end:
your Life makes us children of God,
brothers and sisters to each other.
Increase, O Lord, our faith and our love for you,
present in all the tabernacles of the continent.Grant us to be faithful witnesses
to your Resurrection
for the younger generation of Americans,
so that, in knowing you, they may follow you
and find in you their peace and joy.
Only then will they know that they
are brothers and sisters
of all God's children scattered
throughout the world.You who, in becoming man,
chose to belong to a human family,
teach families the virtues which filled with light
the family home of Nazareth.May families always be united,
as you and the Father are one,
and may they be living witnesses
to love, justice and solidarity;
make them schools of respect,
forgiveness and mutual help,
so that the world may believe;
help them to be the source of vocations
to the priesthood and the consecrated life,
and all the other forms
of firm Christian commitment.Protect your Church and the Successor of Peter,
to whom you, Good Shepherd, have entrusted
the task of feeding your flock.
Grant that the Church in America may flourish
and grow richer in the fruits of holiness.Teach us to love your Mother, Mary,
as you loved her.
Give us strength to proclaim
your word with courage
in the work of the new evangelization,
so that the world may know new hope.
Our Lady of Guadalupe, Mother of America,
pray for us!
