The Church has always considered catechesis one of her primary tasks, for, before Christ
ascended to His Father after His resurrection, He gave the apostles a final command - to make
disciples of all nations and to teach them to observe all that He had commanded. He thus
entrusted them with the mission and power to proclaim to humanity what they had heard, what
they had seen with their eyes, what they had looked upon and touched with their hands,
concerning the Word of Life. He also entrusted them with the mission and power to explain with
authority what He had taught them, His words and actions, His signs and commandments. And He
gave them the Spirit to fulfill this mission.
Very soon the name of catechesis was given to the whole of the efforts within the Church to make
disciples, to help people to believe that Jesus is the Son of God, so that believing they might have
life in His name, and to educate and instruct them in this life and thus build up the Body of
Christ. The Church has not ceased to devote her energy to this task.
Paul VI's Solicitude
The most recent Popes gave catechesis a place of eminence in their pastoral solicitude.
Through his gestures, his preaching, his authoritative interpretation of the Second Vatican Council
(considered by him the great catechism of modern times), and through the whole of his life, my
venerated predecessor Paul VI served the Church's catechesis in a particularly exemplary fashion.
On March 18, 1971, he approved the General Catechetical Directory prepared by the Sacred
Congregation for the Clergy, a directory that is still the basic document for encouraging and
guiding catechetical renewal throughout the Church. He set up the International Council for
Catechesis in He defined in masterly fashion the role and significance of catechesis in the
life and mission of the Church when he addressed the participants in the first International
Catechetical Congress on September 25, 1971, and he returned explicitly to the subject in his
Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii nuntiandi. He decided that catechesis, especially that meant for
children and young people, should be the theme of the fourth general assembly of the synod of
Bishops, which was held in October 1977 and which I myself had the joy of taking part in.
A Fruitful Synod
At the end of that synod the fathers presented the Pope with a very rich documentation,
consisting of the various interventions during the assembly, the conclusions of the working groups,
the message that they had with his consent sent to the People of God, and especially the
imposing list of "propositions' in which they expressed their views on a very large number of
aspects of present-day catechesis.
The Synod worked in an exceptional atmosphere of thanksgiving and hope. It saw in catechetical
renewal a precious gift from the Holy Spirit to the Church of today, a gift to which the Christian
communities at all levels throughout the world are responding with a generosity and inventive
dedication that win admiration. The requisite discernment could then be brought to bear on a
reality that is very much alive and it could benefit from great openness among the People of God
to the grace of the Lord and the directives of the magisterium.
Purpose of This Exhortation
It is in the same climate of faith and hope that I am today addressing this apostolic exhortation
to you, venerable brothers and dear sons and daughters. The theme is extremely vast and the
exhortation will keep to only a few of the most topical and decisive aspects of it, as an affirmation
of the happy results of the synod. In essence, the exhortation takes up again the reflections that
were prepared by Pope Paul VI, making abundant use of the documents left by the synod. Pope
John Paul I, whose zeal and gifts as a catechist amazed us all, had taken them in hand and was
preparing to publish them when he was suddenly called to God. To all of us he gave an example
of catechesis at once popular and concentrated on the essential, one made up of simple words
and actions that were able to touch the heart. I am therefore taking up the inheritance of these two
Popes in response to the request which was expressly formulated by the Bishops at the end of the
fourth general assembly of the synod and which was welcomed by Pope Paul VI in his closing
speech. I am also doing so in order to fulfill one of the chief duties of my apostolic charge.
Catechesis has always been a central care in my ministry as a priest and as a Bishop.
I ardently desire that this apostolic exhortation to the whole Church should strengthen the solidity
of the faith and of Christian living, should give fresh vigor to the initiatives in hand, should stimulate
creativity - with the required vigilance - and should help to spread among the communities the joy
of bringing the mystery of Christ to the world.
WE HAVE BUT ONE TEACHER, JESUS CHRIST
Putting Into Communion With the Person of Christ
The fourth general assembly of the synod of Bishops often stressed the Christocentricity of all
authentic catechesis. We can here use the word "Christocentricity" in both its meanings, which are
not opposed to each other or mutually exclusive, but each of which rather demands and completes
the other.
In the first place, it is intended to stress that at the heart of catechesis we find, in essence, a
Person, the Person of Jesus of Nazareth, "the only Son from the Father...full of grace and
truth," who suffered and died for us and who now, after rising, is living with us forever. It is
Jesus who is "the way, and the truth, and the life," and Christian living consists in following
Christ, the sequela Christi.
The primary and essential object of catechesis is, to use an expression dear to St. Paul and also
to contemporary theology, "the mystery of Christ." Catechizing is in a way to lead a person to
study this mystery in all its dimensions: "to make all men see what is the plan of the
mystery...comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth...know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge...(and be filled) with all the fullness of
God." It is therefore to reveal in the Person of Christ the whole of God's eternal design
reaching fulfillment in that Person. It is to seek to understand the meaning of Christ's actions and
words and of the signs worked by Him, for they simultaneously hide and reveal His mystery.
Accordingly, the definitive aim of catechesis is to put people not only in touch but in communion, in
intimacy, with Jesus Christ: only He can lead us to the love of the Father in the Spirit and make us
share in the life of the Holy Trinity.
Transmitting Christ's Teaching
Christocentricity in catechesis also means the intention to transmit not one's own teaching or
that of some other master, but the teaching of Jesus Christ, the Truth that He communicates or, to
put it more precisely, the Truth that He is. We must therefore say that in catechesis it is Christ,
the Incarnate Word and Son of God, who is taught - everything else is taught with reference to
Him - and it is Christ alone who teaches - anyone else teaches to the extent that he is Christ's
spokesman, enabling Christ to teach with his lips. Whatever be the level of his responsibility in the
Church, every catechist must constantly endeavor to transmit by his teaching and behavior the
teaching and life of Jesus. He will not seek to keep directed towards himself and his personal
opinions and attitudes the attention and the consent of the mind and heart of the person he is
catechizing. Above all, he will not try to inculcate his personal opinions and options as if they
expressed Christ's teaching and the lessons of His life. Every catechist should be able to apply to
himself the mysterious words of Jesus: "My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me." St.
Paul did this when he was dealing with a question of prime importance: "I received from the Lord
what I also delivered to you." What assiduous study of the word of God transmitted by the
Church's magisterium, what profound familiarity with Christ and with the Father, what a spirit of
prayer, what detachment from self must a catechist have in order that he can say: "My teaching is
not mine!"
Christ the Teacher
This teaching is not a body of abstract truths. It is the communication of the living mystery of
God. The Person teaching it in the Gospel is altogether superior in excellence to the "masters" in
Israel, and the nature of His doctrine surpasses theirs in every way because of the unique link
between what He says, what He does and what He is. Nevertheless, the Gospels clearly relate
occasions when Jesus "taught." "Jesus began to do and teach" - with these two verbs, placed
at the beginning of the book of the Acts, St. Luke links and at the same time distinguishes two
poles in Christ's mission.
Jesus taught. It is the witness that He gives of Himself: "Day after day I sat in the temple
teaching." It is the admiring observation of the evangelists, surprised to see Him teaching
everywhere and at all times, teaching in a manner and with an authority previously unknown:
"Crowds gathered to him again; and again, as his custom was, he taught them "; "and they
were astonished at his teaching, for he taught them as one who had authority." It is also what
His enemies note for the purpose of drawing from it grounds for accusation and condemnation:
"He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judaea, from Galilee even to this place."
The One "Teacher"
One who teaches in this way has a unique title to the name of "Teacher." Throughout the New
Testament, especially in the Gospels, how many times is He given this title of Teacher! Of
course the Twelve, the other disciples, and the crowds of listeners call Him "Teacher" in tones of
admiration, trust and tenderness. Even the Pharisees and the Sadducees, the doctors of the
law, and the Jews in general do not refuse Him the title: "Teacher, we wish to see a sign from
you"; "Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" But above all, Jesus Himself at
particularly solemn and highly significant moments calls Himself Teacher: "You call me teacher
and Lord; and you are right, for so I am"; and He proclaims the singularity, the uniqueness of
His character as teacher: "You have one teacher," the Christ. One can understand why people
of every kind, race and nation have for 2,000 years in all the languages of the earth given Him this
title with veneration, repeating in their own ways the exclamation of Nicodemus: "We know that
you are a teacher come from God."
This image of Christ the Teacher is at once majestic and familiar, impressive and reassuring. It
comes from the pen of the evangelists and it has often been evoked subsequently in iconography
since earliest Christian times, so captivating is it. And I am pleased to evoke it in my turn at the
beginning of these considerations on catechesis in the modern world.
Teaching Through His Life as a Whole
In doing so, I am not forgetful that the majesty of Christ the Teacher and the unique consistency
and persuasiveness of His teaching can only be explained by the fact that His words, His parables
and His arguments are never separable from His life and His very being. Accordingly, the whole of
Christ's life was a continual teaching: His silences, His miracles, His gestures, His prayer, His love
for people, His special affection for the little and the poor, His acceptance of the total sacrifice on
the cross for the redemption of the world, and His resurrection are the actualization of His word
and the fulfillment of revelation. Hence for Christians the crucifix is one of the most sublime and
popular images of Christ the Teacher.
These considerations follow in the wake of the great traditions of the Church and they all
strengthen our fervor with regard to Christ, the Teacher who reveals God to man and man to
himself, the Teacher who saves, sanctifies and guides, who lives, who speaks, rouses, moves,
redresses, judges, forgives, and goes with us day by day on the path of history, the Teacher who
comes and will come in glory.
Only in deep communion with Him will catechists find light and strength for an authentic, desirable
renewal of catechesis.
AN EXPERIENCE AS OLD AS THE CHURCH
The Mission of the Apostles
The image of Christ the Teacher was stamped on the spirit of the Twelve and of the first
disciples, and the command "Go...and make disciples of all nations" set the course for the
whole of their lives. St. John bears witness to this in his Gospel when he reports the words of
Jesus: "No longer do I call you servants, for the servant does not know what his master is doing;
but I have called you friends, for all that I have heard from my Father I have made known to
you." It was not they who chose to follow Jesus; it was Jesus who chose them, kept them with
Him, and appointed them even before His Passover, that they should go and bear fruit and that
their fruit should remain. For this reason He formally conferred on them after the resurrection
the mission of making disciples of all nations.
The whole of the book of the Acts of the Apostles is a witness that they were faithful to their
vocation and to the mission they had received. The members of the first Christian community are
seen in it as "devoted to the apostles" teaching and fellowship, to the breaking of bread and the
prayers." Without any doubt we find in that a lasting image of the Church being born of and
continually nourished by the word of the Lord, thanks to the teaching of the apostles, celebrating
that word in the Eucharistic Sacrifice and bearing witness to it before the world in the sign of
charity.
When those who opposed the apostles took offense at their activity, it was because they were
"annoyed because (the apostles) were teaching the people" and the order they gave them was
not to teach at all in the name of Jesus. But we know that the apostles considered it right to
listen to God rather than to men on this very matter.
Catechesis in the Apostolic Age
1The apostles were not slow to share with others the ministry of apostleship. They
transmitted to their successors the task of teaching. They entrusted it also to the deacons from the
moment of their institution: Stephen, "full of grace and power," taught unceasingly, moved by the
wisdom of the Spirit. The apostles associated "many others" with themselves in the task of
teaching, and even simple Christians scattered by persecution "went about preaching the
word." St. Paul was in a pre-eminent way the herald of this preaching, from Antioch to Rome,
where the last picture of him that we have in Acts is that of a person "teaching about the Lord
Jesus Christ quite openly." His numerous letters continue and give greater depth to his
teaching. The letters of Peter, John, James and Jude are also, in every case, evidence of
catechesis in the apostolic age.
Before being written down, the Gospels were the expression of an oral teaching passed on to the
Christian communities, and they display with varying degrees of clarity a catechetical structure. St.
Matthew's account has indeed been called the catechist's Gospel, and St. Mark's the
catechumen's Gospel.
The Fathers of the Church
1This mission of teaching that belonged to the apostles and their first fellow workers was
continued by the Church. Making herself day after day a disciple of the Lord, she earned the title
of "Mother and Teacher." From Clement of Rome to Origen, the post-apostolic age saw
the birth of remarkable works. Next we see a striking fact: Some of the most impressive Bishops
and pastors, especially in the third and fourth centuries considered it an important part of their
espiscopal ministry to deliver catechetical instructions and write treatises. It was the age of Cyril of
Jerusalem and John Chrysostom, of Ambrose and Augustine, the age that saw the flowering, from
the pen of numerous Fathers of the Church, of works that are still models for us.
It would be impossible here to recall, even very briefly the catechesis that gave support to the
spread and advance of the Church in the various periods of history, in every continent, and in the
widest variety of social and cultural contexts. There was indeed no lack of difficulties. But the word
of the Lord completed its course down the centuries; it sped on and triumphed, to use the words of
the Apostle Paul.
Councils and Missionary Activity
1The ministry of catechesis draws ever fresh energy from the councils. The Council of Trent is a
noteworthy example of this. It gave catechesis priority in its constitutions and decrees. It lies at the
origin of the Roman Catechism, which is also known by the name of that council and which is a
work of the first rank as a summary of Christian teaching and traditional theology for use by
priests. It gave rise to a remarkable organization of catechesis in the Church. It aroused the clergy
to their duty of giving catechetical instruction. Thanks to the work of holy theologians such as St.
Charles Borromeo, St. Robert Bellarmine and St. Peter Canisius, it involved the publication of
catechisms that were real models for that period. May the Second Vatican Council stir up in our
time a like enthusiasm and similar activity.
The missions are also a special area for the application of catechesis. The People of God have
thus continued for almost 2,000 years to educate themselves in the faith in ways adapted to the
various situations of believers and the many different circumstances in which the Church finds
herself.
Catechesis is intimately bound up with the whole of the Church's life. Not only her geographical
extension and numerical increase, but even more, her inner growth and correspondence with
God's plan depend essentially on catechesis. It is worthwhile pointing out some of the many
lessons to be drawn from the experiences in Church history that we have just recalled.
Catechesis as the Church's Right and Duty
1To begin with, it is clear that the Church has always looked on catechesis as a sacred duty
and an inalienable right. On the one hand, it is certainly a duty springing from a command given by
the Lord and resting above all on those who in the new covenant receive the call to the ministry of
being pastors. On the other hand, one can likewise speak of a right: from the theological point of
view every baptized person, precisely the reason of being baptized, has the right to receive from
the Church instruction and education enabling him or her to enter on a truly Christian life; and from
the viewpoint of human rights, every human being has the right to seek religious truth and adhere
to it freely, that is to say, "without coercion on the part of individuals or of social groups and any
human power," in such a way that in this matter of religion, "no one is to be forced to act against
his or her conscience or prevented from acting in conformity to it."
That is why catechetical activity should be able to be carried out in favorable circumstances of
time and place, and should have access to the mass media and suitable equipment, without
discrimination against parents, those receiving catechesis or those imparting it. At present this
right is admittedly being given growing recognition, at least on the level of its main principles, as is
shown by international declarations and conventions in which, whatever their limitations, one can
recognize the desires of the consciences of many people today. But the right is being violated
by many States, even to the point that imparting catechesis, having it imparted, and receiving it
become punishable offenses. I vigorously raise my voice in union with the synod fathers against all
discrimination in the field of catechesis, and at the same time I again make a pressing appeal to
those in authority to put a complete end to these constraints on human freedom in general and on
religious freedom in particular.
Priority of This Task
The second lesson concerns the place of catechesis in the Church's pastoral programs. The
more the Church, whether on the local or the universal level, gives catechesis priority over other
works and undertakings the results of which would be more spectacular, the more she finds in
catechesis a strengthening of her internal life as a community of believers and of her external
activity as a missionary Church. As the 20th century draws to a close, the Church is bidden by
God and by events - each of them a call from Him - to renew her trust in catechetical activity as a
prime aspect of her mission. She is bidden to offer catechesis her best resources in people and
energy, without sparing effort, toil or material means, in order to organize it better and to train
qualified personnel. This is no mere human calculation; it is an attitude of faith. And an attitude of
faith always has reference to the faithfulness of God, who never fails to respond.
Shared But Differentiated Responsibility
The third lesson is that catechesis always has been and always will be a work for which the
whole Church must feel responsible and must wish to be responsible. But the Church's members
have different responsibilities, derived from each one's mission. Because of their charge, pastors
have, at differing levels, the chief responsibility for fostering, guiding and coordinating catechesis.
For his part, the Pope has a lively awareness of the primary responsibility that rests on him in this
field: In this he finds reasons for pastoral concern but principally a source of joy and hope. Priests
and religious have in catechesis a pre-eminent field for their apostolate. On another level, parents
have a unique responsibility. Teachers, the various ministers of the Church, catechists, and also
organizers of social communications, all have in various degrees very precise responsibilities in
this education of the believing conscience, an education that is important for the life of the Church
and affects the life of society as such. It would be one of the best results of the general assembly
of the synod that was entirely devoted to catechesis if it stirred up in the Church as a whole and in
each sector of the Church a lively and active awareness of this differentiated but shared
responsibility.
Continual Balanced Renewal
Finally, catechesis needs to be continually renewed by a certain broadening of its concept, by
the revision of its methods, by the search for suitable language, and by the utilization of new
means of transmitting the message. Renewal is sometimes unequal in value; the synod fathers
realistically recognized, not only an undeniable advance in the vitality of catechetical activity and
promising initiatives, but also the limitations or even "deficiencies" in what has been achieved to
date. These limitations are particularly serious when they endanger integrity of content. The
message to the People of God rightly stressed that "routine, with its refusal to accept any change,
and improvisation, with its readiness for any venture, are equally dangerous" for catechesis.
Routine leads to stagnation, lethargy and eventual paralysis. Improvisation begets confusion on
the part of those being given catechesis and, when these are children, on the part of their parents;
it also begets all kinds of deviations, and the fracturing and eventually the complete destruction of
unity. It is important for the Church to give proof today, as she has done at other periods of her
history, of evangelical wisdom, courage and fidelity in seeking out and putting into operation new
methods and new prospects for catechetical instruction.
CATECHESIS IN THE CHURCH'S PASTORAL AND MISSIONARY ACTIVITY
Catechesis as a Stage in Evangelization
Catechesis cannot be dissociated from the Church's pastoral and missionary activity as a
whole. Nevertheless it has a specific character which was repeatedly the object of inquiry during
the preparatory work and throughout the course of the fourth general assembly of the synod of
Bishops. The question also interests the public both within and outside the Church.
This is not the place for giving a rigorous formal definition of catechesis, which has been
sufficiently explained in the General Catechetical Directory. It is for specialists to clarify more
and more its concept and divisions.
In view of uncertainties in practice, let us simply recall the essential landmarks - they are already
solidly established in Church documents - that are essential for an exact understanding of
catechesis and without which there is a risk of failing to grasp its full meaning and import.
All in all, it can be taken here that catechesis is an education of children, young people and adults
in the faith, which includes especially the teaching of Christian doctrine imparted, generally
speaking, in an organic and systematic way, with a view to initiating the hearers into the fullness of
Christian life. Accordingly, while not being formally identified with them, catechesis is built on a
certain number of elements of the Church's pastoral mission that have a catechetical aspect, that
prepare for catechesis, or that spring from it. These elements are: the initial proclamation of the
Gospel or missionary preaching through the kerygma to arouse faith, apologetics or examination
of the reasons for belief, experience of Christian living, celebration of the sacraments, integration
into the ecclesial community, and apostolic and missionary witness.
Let us first of all recall that there is no separation or opposition between catechesis and
evangelization. Nor can the two be simply identified with each other. Instead, they have close links
whereby they integrate and complement each other.
The Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii nuntiandi of December 8, 1975, on evangelization in the
modern world, rightly stressed that evangelization - which has the aim of bringing the Good News
to the whole of humanity, so that all may live by it - is a rich, complex and dynamic reality, made
up of elements, or one could say moments, that are essential and different from each other, and
that must all be kept in view simultaneously. Catechesis is one of these moments - a very
remarkable one - in the whole process of evangelization.
Catechesis and the Initial Proclamation of the Gospel
1The specific character of catechesis, as distinct from the initial conversion - bringing
proclamation of the Gospel, has the twofold objective of maturing the initial faith and of educating
the true disciple of Christ by means of a deeper and more systematic knowledge of the person and
the message of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But in catechetical practice, this model order must allow for the fact that the initial evangelization
has often not taken place. A certain number of children baptized in infancy come for catechesis in
the parish without receiving any other initiation into the faith and still without any explicit personal
attachment to Jesus Christ; they only have the capacity to believe placed within them by Baptism
and the presence of the Holy Spirit; and opposition is quickly created by the prejudices of their
non-Christian family background or of the positivist spirit of their education. In addition, there are
other children who have not been baptized and whose parents agree only at a later date to
religious education: for practical reasons, the catechumenal stage of these children will often be
carried out largely in the course of the ordinary catechesis. Again, many pre-adolescents and
adolescents who have been baptized and been given a systematic catechesis and the sacraments
still remain hesitant for a long time about committing their whole lives to Jesus Christ - if,
moreover, they do not attempt to avoid religious education in the name of their freedom. Finally,
even adults are not safe from temptations to doubt or to abandon their faith, especially as a result
of their unbelieving surroundings. This means that "catechesis" must often concern itself not only
with nourishing and teaching the faith, but also with arousing it unceasingly with the help of grace,
with opening the heart, with converting, and with preparing total adherence to Jesus Christ on the
part of those who are still on the threshold of faith. This concern will in part decide the tone, the
language and the method of catechesis.
Specific Aim of Catechesis
Nevertheless, the specific aim of catechesis is to develop, with God's help, an as yet initial
faith, and to advance in fullness and to nourish day by day the Christian life of the faithful, young
and old. It is in fact a matter of giving growth, at the level of knowledge and in life, to the seed of
faith sown by the Holy Spirit with the initial proclamation and effectively transmitted by Baptism.
Catechesis aims therefore at developing understanding of the mystery of Christ in the light of
God's word, so that the whole of a person's humanity is impregnated by that word. Changed by
the working of grace into a new creature, the Christian thus sets himself to follow Christ and learns
more and more within the Church to think like Him, to judge like Him, to act in conformity with His
commandments, and to hope as He invites us to.
To put it more precisely: within the whole process of evangelization, the aim of catechesis is to be
the teaching and maturation stage, that is to say, the period in which the Christian, having
accepted by faith the person of Jesus Christ as the one Lord and having given Him complete
adherence by sincere conversion of heart, endeavors to know better this Jesus to whom he has
entrusted himself: to know His "mystery," the kingdom of God proclaimed by Him, the
requirements and promises contained in His Gospel message, and the paths that He has laid
down for anyone who wishes to follow Him.
It is true that being a Christian means saying "yes" to Jesus Christ, but let us remember that this
"yes" has two levels: It consists in surrendering to the word of God and relying on it, but it also
means, at a later stage, endeavoring to know better - and better the profound meaning of this
word.
Need for Systematic Catechesis
In his closing speech at the fourth general assembly of the synod, Pope Paul VI rejoiced "to
see how everyone drew attention to the absolute need for systematic catechesis, precisely
because it is this reflective study of the Christian mystery that fundamentally distinguishes
catechesis from all other ways of presenting the word of God."
In view of practical difficulties, attention must be drawn to some of the characteristics of this
instruction:
- It must be systematic, not improvised but programd to reach a precise goal;
It must deal with essentials, without any claim to tackle all disputed questions or to transform
itself into theological research or scientific exegesis;
It must nevertheless be sufficiently complete, not stopping short at the initial proclamation of
the Christian mystery such as we have in the kerygma;
- It must be an integral Christian initiation, open to all the other factors of Christian life.
I am not forgetting the interest of the many different occasions for catechesis connected with
personal, family, social and ecclesial life - these occasions must be utilized and I shall return to
them in I - but I am stressing the need for organic and systematic Christian instruction,
because of the tendency in various quarters to minimize its importance.
Catechesis and Life Experience
It is useless to play off orthopraxis against orthodoxy: Christianity is inseparably both. Firm and
well-thought - out convictions lead to courageous and upright action, the endeavor to educate the
faithful to live as disciples of Christ today calls for and facilitates a discovery in depth of the
mystery of Christ in the history of salvation.
It is also quite useless to campaign for the abandonment of serious and orderly study of the
message of Christ in the name of a method concentrating on life experience. "No one can arrive at
the whole truth on the basis solely of some simple private experience, that is to say, without an
adequate explanation of the message of Christ, who is `the way, and the truth, and the life'."
Nor is any opposition to be set up between a catechesis taking life as its point of departure and a
traditional doctrinal and systematic catechesis. Authentic catechesis is always an orderly and
systematic initiation into the revelation that God has given of Himself to humanity in Christ Jesus,
a revelation stored in the depths of the Church's memory and in Sacred Scripture, and constantly
communicated from one generation to the next by a living, active traditio. This revelation is not
however isolated from life or artificially juxtaposed to it. It is concerned with the ultimate meaning
of life and it illumines the whole of life with the light of the Gospel, to inspire it or to question it.
That is why we can apply to catechists an expression used by the Second Vatican Council with
special reference to priests: "Instructors (of the human being and his life) in the faith."
Catechesis and Sacraments
Catechesis is intrinsically linked with the whole of liturgical and sacramental activity, for it is in
the sacraments, especially in the Eucharist, that Christ Jesus works in fullness for the
transformation of human beings.
In the early Church, the catechumenate and preparation for the sacraments of Baptism and the
Eucharist were the same thing. Although in the countries that have long been Christian the Church
has changed her practice in this field, the catechumenate has never been abolished; on the
contrary, it is experiencing a renewal in those countries and is abundantly practiced in the
young missionary Churches. In any case, catechesis always has reference to the sacraments. On
the one hand, the catechesis that prepares for the sacraments is an eminent kind, and every form
of catechesis necessarily leads to the sacraments of faith. On the other hand, authentic practice of
the sacraments is bound to have a catechetical aspect. In other words, sacramental life is
impoverished and very soon turns into hollow ritualism if it is not based on serious knowledge of
the meaning of the sacraments, and catechesis becomes intellectualized if it fails to come alive in
the sacramental practice.
Catechesis and Ecclesial Community
Finally, catechesis is closely linked with the responsible activity of the Church and of Christians
in the world. A person who has given adherence to Jesus Christ by faith and is endeavoring to
consolidate that faith by catechesis needs to live in communion with those who have taken the
same step. Catechesis runs the risk of becoming barren if no community of faith and Christian life
takes the catechumen in at a certain stage of his catechesis. That is why the ecclesial community
at all levels has a twofold responsibility with regard to catechesis: it has the responsibility of
providing for the training of its members, but it also has the responsibility of welcoming them into
an environment where they can live as fully as possible what they have learned.
Catechesis is likewise open to missionary dynamism. If catechesis is done well, Christians will be
eager to bear witness to their faith, to hand it on to their children, to make it known to others, and
to serve the human community in every way.
Catechesis in the Wide Sense Necessary for Maturity and Strength of Faith
Thus through catechesis the Gospel kerygma (the initial ardent proclamation by which a
person is one day overwhelmed and brought to the decision to entrust himself to Jesus Christ by
faith) is gradually deepened, developed in its implicit consequences, explained in language that
includes an appeal to reason, and channelled towards Christian practice in the Church and the
world. All this is no less evangelical than the kerygma, in spite of what is said by certain people
who consider that catechesis necessarily rationalizes, dries up and eventually kills all that is living,
spontaneous and vibrant in the kerygma. The truths studied in catechesis are the same truths that
touched the person's heart when he heard them for the first time. Far from blunting or exhausting
them, the fact of knowing them better should make them even more challenging and decisive for
one's life.
In the understanding expounded here, catechesis keeps the entirely pastoral perspective with
which the synod viewed it. This broad meaning of catechesis in no way contradicts but rather
includes and goes beyond a narrow meaning which was once commonly given to catechesis in
didactic expositions, namely, the simple teaching of the formulas that express faith.
In the final analysis, catechesis is necessary both for the maturation of the faith of Christians and
for their witness in the world: It is aimed at bringing Christians to "attain to the unity of the faith and
of the knowledge of the Son of God, to mature manhood, to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ"; it is also aimed at making them prepared to make a defense to anyone who
calls them to account for the hope that is in them.
THE WHOLE OF THE GOOD NEWS DRAWN FROM ITS SOURCE
Content of the Message
Since catechesis is a moment or aspect of evangelization, its content cannot be anything else
but the content of evangelization as a whole. The one message - the Good News of salvation -
that has been heard once or hundreds of times and has been accepted with the heart, is in
catechesis probed unceasingly by reflection and systematic study, by awareness of its
repercussions on one's personal life - an awareness calling for ever greater commitment - and by
inserting it into an organic and harmonious whole, namely, Christian living in society and the world.
The Source
Catechesis will always draw its content from the living source of the Word of God transmitted
in Tradition and the Scriptures, for "sacred Tradition and Sacred Scripture make up a single
sacred deposit of the Word of God, which is entrusted to the Church," as was recalled by the
Second Vatican Council, which desired that "the ministry of the word - pastoral preaching,
catechetics and all forms of Christian instruction... - (should be) healthily nourished and (should)
thrive in holiness through the word of Scripture."
To speak of Tradition and Scripture as the source of catechesis is to draw attention to the fact that
catechesis must be impregnated and penetrated by the thought, the spirit and the outlook of the
Bible and the Gospels through assiduous contact with the texts themselves; but it is also a
reminder that catechesis will be all the richer and more effective for reading the texts with the
intelligence and the heart of the Church and for drawing inspiration from the 2,000 years of the
Church's reflection and life.
The Church's teaching, liturgy and life spring from this source and lead back to it, under the
guidance of the pastors and, in particular, of the doctrinal magisterium entrusted to them by the
Lord.
The Creed, an Exceptionally Important Expression of Doctrine
An exceptionally important expression of the living heritage placed in the custody of the
pastors is found in the Creed or, to put it more concretely, in the Creeds that at crucial moments
have summed up the Church's faith in felicitous syntheses. In the course of the centuries an
important element of catechesis was constituted by the traditio Symboli (transmission of the
summary of the faith), followed by the transmission of the Lord's Prayer. This expressive rite has in
our time been reintroduced into the initiation of catechumens. Should not greater use be made
of an adapted form of it to mark that most important stage at which a new disciple of Jesus Christ
accepts with full awareness and courage the content of what will from then on be the object of his
earnest study?
In the Creed of the People of God, proclaimed at the close of the l9th centenary of the martyrdom
of the Apostles Peter and Paul, my predecessor Paul VI decided to bring together the essential
elements of the Catholic Faith, especially those that presented greater difficulty or risked being
ignored. This is a sure point of reference for the content of catechesis.
Factors That Must Not Be Neglected
In the third chapter of his Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii nuntiandi, the same Pope recalled
"the essential content, the living substance" of evangelization. Catechesis, too, must keep in
mind each of these factors and also the living synthesis of which they are part.
I shall therefore limit myself here simply to recalling one or two points. Anyone can see, for
instance, how important it is to make the child, the adolescent, the person advancing in faith
understand "what can be known about God"; to be able in a way to tell them: "What you
worship as unknown, this I proclaim to you"; to set forth briefly for them the mystery of the
Word of God become man and accomplishing man's salvation by His Passover, that is to say,
through His death and resurrection, but also by His preaching, by the signs worked by Him, and by
the sacraments of His permanent presence in our midst. The synod fathers were indeed inspired
when they asked that care should be taken not to reduce Christ to His humanity alone or His
message to a no more than earthly dimension, but that He should be recognized as the Son of
God, the Mediator giving us in the Spirit free access to the Father.
It is important to display before the eyes of the intelligence and of the heart, in the light of faith, the
sacrament of Christ's presence constituted by the mystery of the Church, which is an assembly of
human beings who are sinners and yet have at the same time been sanctified and who make up
the family of God gathered together by the Lord under the guidance of those whom "the Holy Spirit
has made...guardians, to feed the Church of God."
It is important to explain that the history of the human race, marked as it is by grace and sin,
greatness and misery, is taken up by God in His Son Jesus, "foreshadowing in some way the age
which is to come."
Finally, it is important to reveal frankly the demands - demands that involve self-denial but also joy
- made by what the Apostle Paul liked to call "newness of life," "a new creation," being in
Christ, and "eternal life in Christ Jesus," which is the same thing as life in the world but
lived in accordance with the beatitudes and called to an extension and transfiguration hereafter.
Hence the importance in catechesis of personal moral commitments in keeping with the Gospel
and of Christian attitudes, whether heroic or very simple, to life and the world - what we call the
Christian or evangelical virtues. Hence also, in its endeavor to educate faith, the concern of
catechesis not to omit but to clarify properly realities such as man's activity for his integral
liberation, the search for a society with greater solidarity and fraternity, the fight for justice and
the building of peace.
Besides, it is not to be thought that this dimension of catechesis is altogether new. As early as the
patristic age, St. Ambrose and St. John Chrysostom - to quote only them - gave prominence to the
social consequences of the demands made by the Gospel. Close to our own time, the catechism
of St. Pius X explicitly listed oppressing the poor and depriving workers of their just wages among
the sins that cry to God for vengeance. Since Rerum novarum especially, social concern has
been actively present in the catechetical teaching of the Popes and the Bishops. Many synod
fathers rightly insisted that the rich heritage of the Church's social teaching should, in appropriate
forms, find a place in the general catechetical education of the faithful.
Integrity of Content
With regard to the content of catechesis, three important points deserve special attention
today.
The first point concerns the integrity of the content. In order that the sacrificial offering of his or her
faith should be perfect, the person who becomes a disciple of Christ has the right to receive
"the word of faith" not in mutilated, falsified or diminished form but whole and entire, in all its
rigor and vigor. Unfaithfulness on some point to the integrity of the message means a dangerous
weakening of catechesis and putting at risk the results that Christ and the ecclesial community
have a right to expect from it. It is certainly not by chance that the final command of Jesus in
Matthew's Gospel bears the mark of a certain entireness: "All authority...has been given to
me...make disciples of all nations...teaching them to observe all...I am with you always." This is
why, when a person first becomes aware of "the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus,"
whom he has encountered by faith, and has the perhaps unconscious desire to know Him more
extensively and better," hearing about Him and being taught in Him, as the truth is in Jesus,
there is no valid pretext for refusing Him any part whatever of that knowledge. What kind of
catechesis would it be that failed to give their full place to man's creation and sin; to God's plan of
redemption and its long, loving preparation and realization; to the incarnation of the Son of God; to
Mary, the Immaculate One, the Mother of God, ever Virgin, raised body and soul to the glory of
heaven, and to her role in the mystery of salvation; to the mystery of lawlessness at work in our
lives and the power of God freeing us from it; to the need for penance and asceticism; to the
sacramental and liturgical actions; to the reality of the Eucharistic Presence; to participation in
divine life here and hereafter, and so on? Thus, no true catechist can lawfully, on his own initiative,
make a selection of what he considers important in the deposit of faith as opposed to what he
considers unimportant, so as to teach the one and reject the other.
By Means of Suitable Pedagogical Methods
This gives rise to a second remark. It can happen that in the present situation of catechesis
reasons of method or pedagogy suggest that the communication of the riches of the content of
catechesis should be organized in one way rather than another. Besides, integrity does not
dispense from balance and from the organic hierarchical character through which the truths to be
taught, the norms to be transmitted, and the ways of Christian life to be indicated will be given the
proper importance due to each. It can also happen that a particular sort of language proves
preferable for transmitting this content to a particular individual or group. The choice made will be
a valid one to the extent that, far from being dictated by more or less subjective theories or
prejudices stamped with a certain ideology, it is inspired by the humble concern to stay closer to a
content that must remain intact. The method and language used must truly be means for
communicating the whole and not just a part of "the words of eternal life" and the "ways of
life."
Ecumenical Dimension of Catechesis
The great movement, one certainly inspired by the Spirit of Jesus, that has for some years
been causing the Catholic Church to seek with other Christian Churches or confessions the
restoration of the perfect unity willed by the Lord, brings me to the question of the ecumenical
character of catechesis. This movement reached its full prominence in the Second Vatican
Council and since then has taken on a new extension within the Church, as is shown
concretely by the impressive series of events and initiatives with which everyone is now familiar.
Catechesis cannot remain aloof from this ecumenical dimension, since all the faithful are called to
share, according to their capacity and place in the Church, in the movement towards unity.
Catechesis will have an ecumenical dimension if, while not ceasing to teach that the fullness of the
revealed truths and of the means of salvation instituted by Christ is found in the Catholic
Church, it does so with sincere respect, in words and in deeds, for the ecclesial communities
that are not in perfect communion with this Church.
In this context, it is extremely important to give a correct and fair presentation of the other
Churches and ecclesial communities that the Spirit of Christ does not refrain from using as means
of salvation; "moreover, some, even very many, of the outstanding elements and endowments
which together go to build up and give life to the Church herself, can exist outside the visible
boundaries of the Catholic Church." Among other things this presentation will help Catholics to
have both a deeper understanding of their own faith and a better acquaintance with and esteem
for their other Christian brethren, thus facilitating the shared search for the way towards full unity in
the whole truth. It should also help non-Catholics to have a better knowledge and appreciation of
the Catholic Church and her conviction of being the "universal help toward salvation."
Catechesis will have an ecumenical dimension if, in addition, it creates and fosters a true desire
for unity. This will be true all the more if it inspires serious efforts - including the effort of selfpurification in the humility and the fervor of the Spirit in order to clear the ways - with a view not to
facile irenics made up of omissions and concessions on the level of doctrine, but to perfect unity,
when and by what means the Lord will wish.
Finally, catechesis will have an ecumenical dimension if it tries to prepare Catholic children and
young people, as well as adults, for living in contact with non-Catholics, affirming their Catholic
identity while respecting the faith of others.
Ecumenical Collaboration in the Field of Catechesis
In situations of religious plurality, the Bishops can consider it opportune or even necessary to
have certain experiences of collaboration in the field of catechesis between Catholics and other
Christians, complementing the normal catechesis that must in any case be given to Catholics.
Such experiences have a theological foundation in the elements shared by all Christians. But
the communion of faith between Catholics and other Christians is not complete and perfect; in
certain cases there are even profound divergences. Consequently, this ecumenical collaboration is
by its very nature limited: it must never mean a "reduction" to a common minimum. Furthermore,
catechesis does not consist merely in the teaching of doctrine: it also means initiating into the
whole of Christian life, bringing full participation in the sacraments of the Church. Therefore, where
there is an experience of ecumenical collaboration in the field of catechesis, care must be taken
that the education of Catholics in the Catholic Church should be well ensured in matters of
doctrine and of Christian living.
During the synod, a certain number of Bishops drew attention to what they referred to as the
increasingly frequent cases in which the civil authority or other circumstances impose on the
schools in some countries a common instruction in the Christian religion, with common textbooks,
class periods, etc., for Catholics and non-Catholics alike. Needless to say, this is not true
catechesis. But this teaching also has ecumenical importance when it presents Christian doctrine
fairly and honestly. In cases where circumstances impose it, it is important that in addition a
specifically Catholic catechesis should be ensured with all the greater care.
The Question of Textbooks Dealing with the Various Religions
At this point another observation must be made on the same lines but from a different point of
view. State schools sometimes provide their pupils with books that for cultural reasons (history,
morals or literature) present the various religions, including the Catholic religion. An objective
presentation of historical events, of the different religions and of the various Christian confessions
can make a contribution here to better mutual understanding. Care will then be taken that every
effort is made to ensure that the presentation is truly objective and free from the distorting
influence of ideological and political systems or of prejudices with claims to be scientific. In any
case, such schoolbooks can obviously not be considered catechetical works: they lack both the
witness of believers stating their faith to other believers and an understanding of the Christian
mysteries and of what is specific about Catholicism, as these are understood within the faith.
EVERYBODY NEEDS TO BE CATECHIZED
The Importance of Children and the Young
The theme designated by my predecessor Paul VI for the fourth general assembly of the
synod of Bishops was: "Catechesis in our time, with special reference to the catechesis of children
and young people." The increase in the number of young people is without doubt a fact charged
with hope and at the same time with anxiety for a large part of the contemporary world. In certain
countries, especially those of the Third World, more than half of the population is under 25 or 30
years of age. This means millions and millions of children and young people preparing for their
adult future. And there is more than just the factor of numbers: recent events, as well as the daily
news, tell us that, although this countless multitude of young people is here and there dominated
by uncertainty and fear, seduced by the escapism of indifference or drugs, or tempted by nihilism
and violence, nevertheless it constitutes in its major part the great force that amid many hazards is
set on building the civilization of the future.
In our pastoral care we ask ourselves: How are we to reveal Jesus Christ, God made man, to this
multitude of children and young people, reveal Him not just in the fascination of a first fleeting
encounter but through an acquaintance, growing deeper and clearer daily, with Him, His message,
the plan of God that He has revealed, the call He addresses to each person, and the kingdom that
He wishes to establish in this world with the "little flock" of those who believe in Him, a
kingdom that will be complete only in eternity? How are we to enable them to know the meaning,
the import, the fundamental requirements, the law of love, the promises and the hopes of this
kingdom?
There are many observations that could be made about the special characteristics that catechesis
assumes at the different stages of life.
Infants
One moment that is often decisive is the one at which the very young child receives the first
elements of catechesis from its parents and the family surroundings. These elements will perhaps
be no more than a simple revelation of a good and provident Father in heaven to whom the child
learns to turn its heart. The very short prayers that the child learns to lisp will be the start of a
loving dialogue with this hidden God whose word it will then begin to hear. I cannot insist too
strongly on this early initiation by Christian parents in which the child's faculties are integrated into
a living relationship with God. It is a work of prime importance. It demands great love and profound
respect for the child who has a right to a simple and true presentation of the Christian faith.
Children
For the child there comes soon, at school and in Church, in institutions connected with the
parish or with the spiritual care of the Catholic or state school not only an introduction into a wider
social circle, but also the moment for a catechesis aimed at inserting him or her organically into
the life of the Church, a moment that includes an immediate preparation for the celebration of the
sacraments. This catechesis is didactic in character, but is directed towards the giving of witness
in the faith. It is an initial catechesis but not a fragmentary one, since it will have to reveal,
although in an elementary way, all the principal mysteries of faith and their effects on the child's
moral and religious life. It is a catechesis that gives meaning to the sacraments, but at the same
time it receives from the experience of the sacraments a living dimension that keeps it from
remaining merely doctrinal, and it communicates to the child the joy of being a witness to Christ in
ordinary life.
Adolescents
Next comes puberty and adolescence, with all the greatness and dangers which that age
brings. It is the time of discovering oneself and one's own inner world, the time of generous plans,
the time when the feeling of love awakens, with the biological impulses of sexuality, the time of the
desire to be together, the time of a particularly intense joy connected with the exhilarating
discovery of life. But often it is also the age of deeper questioning, of anguished or even frustrating
searching, of a certain mistrust of others and dangerous introspection, and the age sometimes of
the first experiences of setbacks and of disappointments. Catechesis cannot ignore these
changeable aspects of this delicate period of life. A catechesis capable of leading the adolescent
to reexamine his or her life and to engage in dialogue, a catechesis that does not ignore the
adolescent's great questions - self-giving, belief, love and the means of expressing it constituted
by sexuality - such a catechesis can be decisive. The revelation of Jesus Christ as a Friend, Guide
and Model, capable of being admired but also imitated; the revelation of this message which
provides an answer to the fundamental questions, the revelation of the loving plan of Christ the
Savior as the incarnation of the only authentic love and as the possibility of uniting the human race
- all this can provide the basis for genuine education in faith. Above all, the mysteries of the
passion and death of Jesus, through which, according to St. Paul, he merited His glorious
resurrection, can speak eloquently to the adolescent's conscience and heart and cast light on his
first sufferings and on the suffering of the world that he is discovering.
The Young
With youth comes the moment of the first great decisions. Although the young may enjoy the
support of the members of their family and their friends, they have to rely on themselves and their
own conscience and must ever more frequently and decisively assume responsibility for their
destiny. Good and evil, grace and sin, life and death will more and more confront one another
within them, not just as moral categories but chiefly as fundamental options which they must
accept or reject lucidly, conscious of their own responsibility. It is obvious that a catechesis which
denounces selfishness in the name of generosity, and which without any illusory oversimplification presents the Christian meaning of work, of the common good, of justice and charity,
a catechesis on international peace and on the advancement of human dignity, on development,
and on liberation, as these are presented in recent documents of the Church, fittingly
completes in the minds of the young the good catechesis on strictly religious realities which is
never to be neglected. Catechesis then takes on considerable importance, since it is the time
when the Gospel can be presented, understood and accepted as capable of giving meaning to life
and thus of inspiring attitudes that would have no other explanation, such as self-sacrifice,
detachment, forbearance, justice, commitment, reconciliation, a sense of the Absolute and the
unseen. All these are traits that distinguish a young person from his or her companions as a
disciple of Jesus Christ.
Catechesis thus prepares for the important Christian commitments of adult life. For example, it is
certain that many vocations to the priesthood and religious life have their origin during a wellimparted catechesis in infancy and adolescence.
From infancy until the threshold of maturity, catechesis is thus a permanent school of the faith and
follows the major stages of life, like a beacon lighting the path of the child, the adolescent and the
young person.
The Adaptation of Catechesis for Young People
It is reassuring to note that, during the fourth general assembly of the synod and the following
years, the Church has widely shared in concern about how to impart catechesis to children and
young people. God grant that the attention thus aroused will long endure in the Church's
consciousness. In this way the synod has been valuable for the whole Church by seeking to trace
with the greatest possible precision the complex characteristics of present-day youth; by showing
that these young persons speak a language into which the message of Jesus must be translated
with patience and wisdom and without betrayal; by demonstrating that, in spite of appearances,
these young people have within them, even though often in a confused way, not just a readiness
or openness, but rather a real desire to know "Jesus...who is called Christ" ; and by indicating
that if the work of catechesis is to be carried out rigorously and seriously, it is today more difficult
and tiring than ever before, because of the obstacles and difficulties of all kinds that it meets; but it
is also more consoling, because of the depth of the response it receives from children and young
people. This is a treasure which the Church can and should count on in the years ahead.
The Handicapped
Children and young people who are physically or mentally handicapped come first to mind.
They have a right, like others of their age, to know "the mystery of faith." The greater difficulties
that they encounter give greater merit to their efforts and to those of their teachers. It is pleasant to
see that Catholic organizations especially dedicated to young handicapped people contributed to
the synod a renewed desire to deal better with this important problem. They deserve to be given
warm encouragement in this endeavor.
Young People Without Religious Support
My thoughts turn next to the ever increasing number of children and young people born and
brought up in a non-Christian or at least non-practicing home but who wish to know the Christian
faith. They must be ensured a catechesis attuned to them, so that they will be able to grow in faith
and live by lt more and more, in spite of the lack of support or even the opposition they meet in
their surroundings.
Adults
To continue the series of receivers of catechesis, I cannot fail to emphasize now one of the
most constant concerns of the synod fathers, a concern imposed with vigor and urgency by
present experiences throughout the world: I am referring to the central problem of the catechesis
of adults. This is the principal form of catechesis, because it is addressed to persons who have the
greatest responsibilities and the capacity to live the Christian message in its fully developed
form. The Christian community cannot carry out a permanent catechesis without the direct and
skilled participation of adults, whether as receivers or as promoters of catechetical activity. The
world, in which the young are called to live and to give witness to the faith which catechesis seeks
to deepen and strengthen, is governed by adults. The faith of these adults too should continually
be enlightened, stimulated and renewed, so that it may pervade the temporal realities in their
charge. Thus, for catechesis to be effective, it must be permanent, and it would be quite useless if
it stopped short at the threshold of maturity, since catechesis, admittedly under another form,
proves no less necessary for adults.
Quasi-Catechumens
Among the adults who need catechesis, our pastoral missionary concern is directed to those
who were born and reared in areas not yet Christianized, and who have never been able to study
deeply the Christian teaching that the circumstances of life have at a certain moment caused them
to come across. It is also directed to those who in childhood received a catechesis suited to their
age but who later drifted away from all religious practice and as adults find themselves with
religious knowledge of a rather childish kind. It is likewise directed to those who feel the effects of
a catechesis received early in life but badly imparted or badly assimilated. It is directed to those
who, although they were born in a Christian country or in sociologically Christian surroundings,
have never been educated in their faith and, as adult are really catechumens.
Diversified and Complementary Forms of Catechesis
Catechesis is therefore for adults of every age, including the elderly-persons who deserve
particular attention in view of their experience and their problems - no less than for children,
adolescents and the young. We should also mention migrants, those who are by-passed by
modern developments, those who live in areas of large cities which are often without churches,
buildings and suitable organization, and other such groups. It is desirable that initiatives meant to
give all these groups a Christian formation, with appropriate means (audio-visual aids, booklets,
discussions, lectures), should increase in number, enabling many adults to fill the gap left by an
insufficient or deficient catechesis, to complete harmoniously at a higher level their childhood
catechesis, or even to prepare themselves enough in this field to be able to help others in a more
serious way.
It is important also that the catechesis of children and young people, permanent catechesis, and
the catechesis of adults should not be separate watertight compartments. It is even more
important that there should be no break between them. On the contrary, their perfect
complementarity must be fostered: adults have much to give to young people and children in the
field of catechesis, but they can also receive much from them for the growth of their own Christian
lives.
It must be restated that nobody in the Church of Jesus Christ should feel excused from receiving
catechesis. This is true even of young seminarians and young religious, and of all those called to
the task of being pastors and catechists. They will fulfill this task all the better if they are humble
pupils of the Church, the great giver as well as the great receiver of catechesis.
SOME WAYS AND MEANS OF CATECHESIS
Communications Media
From the oral teaching by the apostles and the letters circulating among the churches down to
the most modern means, catechesis has not ceased to look for the most suitable ways and means
for its mission, with the active participation of the communities and at the urging of the pastors.
This effort must continue.
I think immediately of the great possibilities offered by the means of social communication and the
means of group communication: television, radio, the press, records, tape recordings-the whole
series of audio-visual means. The achievements in these spheres are such as to encourage the
greatest hope. Experience shows, for example, the effect had by instruction given on radio or
television, when it combines a high aesthetic level and rigorous fidelity to the magisterium. The
Church now has many opportunities for considering these questions - as, for instance, on Social
Communications Days - and it is not necessary to speak of them at length here, in spite of their
prime importance.
Utilization of Various Places, Occasions and Gatherings
I am also thinking of various occasions of special value which are exactly suitable for
catechesis: for example, diocesan, regional or national pilgrimages, which gain from being
centered on some judiciously chosen theme based on the life of Christ, of the Blessed Virgin or of
the saints. Then there are the traditional missions, often too hastily dropped but irreplaceable for
the periodic and vigorous renewal of Christian life - they should be revived and brought up to date.
Again there are Bible-study groups, which ought to go beyond exegesis and lead their members to
live by the Word of God. Yet other instances are the meetings of ecclesial basic communities, in
so far as they correspond to the criteria laid down in the Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii
nuntiandi. I may also mention the youth groups that, under varying names and forms but
always with the purpose of making Jesus Christ known and of living by the Gospel, are in some
areas multiplying and flourishing in a sort of springtime that is very comforting for the Church.
These include Catholic action groups, charitable groups, prayer groups and Christian meditation
groups. These groups are a source of great hope for the Church of tomorrow. But, in the name of
Jesus, I exhort the young people who belong to them, their leaders, and the priests who devote
the best part of their ministry to them: no matter what it costs, do not allow these groups-which are
exceptional occasions for meeting others, and which are blessed with such riches of friendship
and solidarity among the young, of joy and enthusiasm, of reflection on events and facts - do not
allow them to lack serious study of Christian doctrine. If they do, they will be in danger - a danger
that has unfortunately proved only too real - of disappointing their members and also the Church.
The catechetical endeavor that is possible in these various surroundings, and in many others
besides, will have all the greater chance of being accepted and bearing fruit if it respects their
individual nature. By becoming part of them in the right way, it will achieve the diversity and
complementarity of approach that will enable it to develop all the riches of its concept, with its
three dimensions of word, memorial and witness-doctrine, celebration and commitment in living -
which the synod Message to the People of God emphasized.
The Homily
This remark is even more valid for the catechesis given in the setting of the liturgy, especially
at the Eucharistic assembly. Respecting the specific nature and proper cadence of this setting, the
homily takes up again the journey of faith put forward by catechesis, and brings it to its natural
fulfillment. At the same time it encourages the Lord's disciples to begin anew each day their
spiritual journey in truth, adoration and thanksgiving. Accordingly, one can say that catechetical
teaching too finds its source and its fulfillment in the Eucharist, within the whole circle of the
liturgical year. Preaching, centered upon the Bible texts, must then in its own way make it possible
to familiarize the faithful with the whole of the mysteries of the faith and with the norms of Christian
living. Much attention must be given to the homily: it should be neither too long nor too short; it
should always be carefully prepared, rich in substance and adapted to the hearers, and reserved
to ordained ministers. The homily should have its place not only in every Sunday and feast-day
Eucharist, but also in the celebration of baptisms, penitential liturgies, marriages and funerals. This
is one of the benefits of the liturgical renewal.
Catechetical Literature
Among these various ways and means - all the Church's activities have a catechetical
dimension-catechetical works, far from losing their essential importance, acquire fresh
significance. One of the major features of the renewal of catechetics today is the rewriting and
multiplication of catechetical books taking place in many parts of the Church. Numerous very
successful works have been produced and are a real treasure in the service of catechetical
instruction. But it must be humbly and honestly recognized that this rich flowering has brought with
it articles and publications which are ambiguous and harmful to young people and to the life of the
Church. In certain places, the desire to find the best forms of expression or to keep up with
fashions in pedagogical methods has often enough resulted in certain catechetical works which
bewilder the young and even adults, either by deliberately or unconsciously omitting elements
essential to the Church's faith, or by attributing excessive importance to certain themes at the
expense of others, or, chiefly, by a rather horizontalist overall view out of keeping with the teaching
of the Church's magisterium.
Therefore, it is not enough to multiply catechetical works. In order that these works may
correspond with their aim, several conditions are essential:
a) they must be linked with the real life of the generation to which they are addressed, showing
close acquaintance with its anxieties and questionings, struggles and hopes;
b) they must try to speak a language comprehensible to the generation in question;
c) they must make a point of giving the whole message of Christ and His Church, without
neglecting or distorting anything, and in expounding it they will follow a line and structure that
highlights what is essential;
d) they must really aim to give to those who use them a better knowledge of the mysteries of
Christ, aimed at true conversion and a life more in conformity with God's will.
Catechisms
All those who take on the heavy task of preparing these catechetical tools, especially
catechism texts, can do so only with the approval of the pastors who have the authority to give it,
and taking their inspiration as closely as possible from the General Catechetical Directory, which
remains the standard of reference.
ln this regard, I must warmly encourage episcopal conferences of the whole world to undertake,
patiently but resolutely, the considerable work to be accomplished in agreement with the Apostolic
See in order to prepare genuine catechisms which will be faithful to the essential content of
revelation and up to date in method, and which will be capable of educating the Christian
generations of the future to a sturdy faith.
This brief mention of ways and means of modern catechetics does not exhaust the wealth of
suggestions worked out by the synod fathers. It is comforting to think that at the present time every
country is seeing valuable collaboration for a more organic and more secure renewal of these
aspects of catechetics. There can be no doubt that the Church will find the experts and the right
means for responding, with God's grace, to the complex requirements of communicating with the
people of today.
V
HOW TO IMPART CATECHESIS
Diversity of Methods
The age and the intellectual development of Christians, their degree of ecclesial and spiritual
maturity and many other personal circumstances demand that catechesis should adopt widely
differing methods for the attainment of its specific aim: education in the faith. On a more general
level, this variety is also demanded by the social and cultural surrounding in which the Church
carries out her catechetical work.
The variety in the methods used is a sign of life and a resource. That is how it was considered by
the fathers of the fourth general assembly of the synod, although they also drew attention to the
conditions necessary for that variety to be useful and not harmful to the unity of the teaching of the
one Faith.
At the Service of Revelation and Conversion
The first question of a general kind that presents itself here concerns the danger and the
temptation to mix catechetical teaching unduly with overt or masked ideological views, especially
political and social ones, or with personal political options. When such views get the better of the -
central message to be transmitted, to the point of obscuring it and putting it in second place or
even using it to further their own ends, catechesis then becomes radically distorted. The synod
rightly insisted on the need for catechesis to remain above one-sided divergent trends - to avoid
"dichotomies" - even in the field of theological interpretation of such questions. It is on the basis of
revelation that catechesis will try to set its course, revelation as transmitted by the universal
magisterium of the Church, in its solemn or ordinary form. This revelation tells of a creating and
redeeming God, Whose Son has come among us in our flesh and enters not only into each
individual's personal history but into human history itself, becoming its center. Accordingly, this
revelation tells of the radical chance of man and the universe, of all that makes up the web of
human life under the influence of the Good News of Jesus Christ. If conceived in this way,
catechesis goes beyond every form of formalistic moralism, although it will include true Christian
moral teaching. Chiefly, it goes beyond any kind of temporal, social or political "messianism." It
seeks to arrive at man's innermost being.
The Message Embodied in Cultures
Now a second question. As I said recently to the members of the Biblical Commission: "The
term 'acculturation' or 'inculturation' may be a neologism, but it expresses very well one factor of
the great mystery of the Incarnation." We can say of catechesis, as well as of evangelization in
general, that it is called to bring the power of the Gospel into the very heart of culture and cultures.
For this purpose, catechesis will seek to know these cultures and their essential components; it
will learn their most significant expressions; it will respect their particular values and riches. In this
manner it will be able to offer these cultures the knowledge of the hidden mystery and help
them to bring forth from their own living tradition original expressions of Christian life, celebration
and thought. Two things must however be kept in mind.
On the one hand the Gospel message cannot be purely and simply isolated from the culture in
which it was first inserted (the biblical world or, more concretely, the cultural milieu in which Jesus
of Nazareth lived), nor, without serious loss, from the cultures in which it has already been
expressed down the centuries; it does not spring spontaneously from any cultural soil; it has
always been transmitted by means of an apostolic dialogue which inevitably becomes part of a
certain dialogue of cultures.
On the other hand, the power of the Gospel everywhere transforms and regenerates. When that
power enters into a culture, it is no surprise that it rectifies many of its elements. There would be
no catechesis if it were the Gospel that had to change when it came into contact with the cultures.
To forget this would simply amount to what St. Paul very forcefully calls "emptying the cross of
Christ of its power."
It is a different matter to take, with wise discernment, certain elements, religious or otherwise, that
form part of the cultural heritage of a human group and use them to help its members to
understand better the whole of the Christian mystery. Genuine catechists know that catechesis
"takes flesh" in the various cultures and milieux: one has only to think of the peoples with their
great differences, of modern youth, of the great variety of circumstances in which people find
themselves today. But they refuse to accept an impoverishment of catechesis through a
renunciation or obscuring of its message, by adaptations, even in language, that would endanger
the "precious deposit" of the faith, or by concessions in matters of faith or morals. They are
convinced that true catechesis eventually enriches these cultures by helping them to go beyond
the defective or even inhuman features in them, and by communicating to their legitimate values
the fullness of Christ.
The Contribution of Popular Devotion
Another question of method concerns the utilization in catechetical instruction of valid
elements in popular piety. I have in mind devotions practiced by the faithful in certain regions with
moving fervor and purity of intention, even if the faith underlying them needs to be purified or
rectified in many aspects. I have in mind certain easily understood prayers that many simple
people are fond of repeating. I have in mind certain acts of piety practiced with a sincere desire to
do penance or to please the Lord. Underlying most of these prayers and practices, besides
elements that should be discarded, there are other elements which, if they were properly used,
could serve very well to help people advance towards knowledge of the mystery of Christ and of
His message: the love and mercy of God, the Incarnation of Christ, His redeeming cross and
resurrection, the activity of the Spirit in each Christian and in the Church, the mystery of the
hereafter, the evangelical virtues to be practiced, the presence of the Christian in the world, etc.
And why should we appeal to non-Christian or even anti-Christian elements refusing to build on
elements which, even if they need to be revised or improved, have something Christian at their
root?
Memorization
The final methodological question the importance of which should at least be referred to-one
that was debated several times in the synod-is that of memorization. In the beginnings of Christian
catechesis, which coincided with a civilization that was mainly oral, recourse was had very freely
to memorization. Catechesis has since then known a long tradition of learning the principal truths
by memorizing. We are all aware that this method can present certain disadvantages, not the least
of which is that it lends itself to insufficient or at times almost non-existent assimilation, reducing all
knowledge to formulas that are repeated without being properly understood. These disadvantages
and the different characteristics of our own civilization have in some places led to the almost
complete suppression - according to some, alas, the definitive suppression - of memorization in
catechesis. And yet certain very authoritative voices made themselves heard on the occasion of
the fourth general assembly of the synod, calling for the restoration of a judicious balance between
reflection and spontaneity, between dialogue and silence, between written work and memory work.
Moreover certain cultures still set great value on memorization.
At a time when, in non-religious teaching in certain countries, more and more complaints are being
made about the unfortunate consequences of disregarding the human faculty of memory, should
we not attempt to put this faculty back into use in an intelligent and even an original way in
catechesis, all the more since the celebration or "memorial" of the great events of the history of
salvation require a precise knowledge of them? A certain memorization of the words of Jesus, of
important Bible passages, of the Ten Commandments, of the formulas of profession of the faith, of
the liturgical texts, of the essential prayers, of key doctrinal ideas, etc., far from being opposed to
the dignity of young Christians, or constituting an obstacle to personal dialogue with the Lord, is a
real need, as the synod fathers forcefully recalled. We must be realists. The blossoms, if we may
call them that, of faith and piety do not grow in the desert places of a memory - less catechesis.
What is essential is that the texts that are memorized must at the same time be taken in and
gradually understood in depth, in order to become a source of Christian life on the personal level
and the community level.
The plurality of methods in contemporary catechesis can be a sign of vitality and ingenuity. In any
case, the method chosen must ultimately be referred to a law that is fundamental for the whole of
the Church's life: the law of fidelity to God and of fidelity to man in a single loving attitude.
VI
THE JOY OF FAITH IN A TROUBLED WORLD
Affirming Christian Identity
We live in a difficult world in which the anguish of seeing the best creations of man slip away
from him and turn against him creates a climate of uncertainty. In this world catechesis should
help Christians to be, for their own joy and the service of all, "light" and "salt." Undoubtedly
this demands that catechesis should strengthen them in their identity and that it should continually
separate itself from the surrounding atmosphere of hesitation, uncertainty and insipidity. Among
the many difficulties, each of them a challenge for faith, I shall indicate a few in order to assist
catechesis in overcoming them.
In an Indifferent World
A few years ago, there was much talk of the secularized world, the post-Christian era. Fashion
changes, but a profound reality remains. Christians today must be formed to live in a world which
largely ignores God or which, in religious matters, in place of an exacting and fraternal dialogue,
stimulating for all, too often flounders in a debasing indifferentism, if it does not remain in a
scornful attitude of "suspicion" in the name of the progress it has made in the field of scientific
"explanations." To "hold on" in this world, to offer to all a "dialogue of salvation" in which each
person feels respected in his or her most basic dignity, the dignity of one who is seeking God, we
need a catechesis which trains the young people and adults of our communities to remain clear
and consistent in their faith, to affirm serenely their Christian and Catholic identity, to "see him who
is invisible" and to adhere so firmly to the absoluteness of God that they can be witnesses to
Him in a materialistic civilization that denies Him.
With the Original Pedagogy of the Faith
The irreducible originality of Christian identity has for corollary and condition no less original a
pedagogy of the faith. Among the many prestigious sciences of man that are nowadays making
immense advances, pedagogy is certainly one of the most important. The attainments of the other
sciences - biology, psychology, sociology - are providing it with valuable elements. The science of
education and the art of teaching are continually being subjected to review, with a view to making
them better adapted or more effective, with varying degrees of success.
There is also a pedagogy of faith, and the good that it can do for catechesis cannot be overstated.
In fact, it is natural that techniques perfected and tested for education in general should be
adapted for the service of education in the faith. However, account must always be taken of the
absolute originality of faith. Pedagogy of faith is not a question of transmitting human knowledge,
even of the highest kind; it is a question of communicating God's revelation in its entirety.
Throughout sacred history, especially in the Gospel, God Himself used a pedagogy that must
continue to be a model for the pedagogy of faith. A technique is of value in catechesis only to the
extent that it serves the faith that is to be transmitted and learned; otherwise it is of no value.
Language Suited to the Service of the Credo
A problem very close to the preceding one is that of language. This is obviously a burning
question today. It is paradoxical to see that, while modern studies, for instance in the field of
communication, semantics and symbology, attribute extraordinary importance to language,
nevertheless language is being misused today for ideological mystification, for mass conformity in
thought and for reducing man to the level of an object.
All this has extensive influence in the field of catechesis. For catechesis has a pressing obligation
to speak a language suited to today's children and young people in general and to many other
categories of people-the language of students, intellectuals and scientists; the language of the
illiterate or of people of simple culture; the language of the handicapped, and so on. St. Augustine
encountered this same problem and contributed to its solution for his own time with his wellknown
work De Catechizandis Rudibus. In catechesis as in theology, there is no doubt that the question
of language is of the first order. But there is good reason for recalling here that catechesis cannot
admit any language that would result in altering the substance of the content of the Creed, under
any pretext whatever, even a pretended scientific one. Deceitful or beguiling language is no better.
On the contrary, the supreme rule is that the great advances in the science of language must be
capable of being placed at the service of catechesis so as to enable it really to "tell" or
"communicate" to the child, the adolescent, the young people and adults of today the whole
content of doctrine without distortion.
Research and Certainty of Faith
A more subtle challenge occasionally comes from the very way of conceiving faith. Certain
contemporary philosophical schools, which seem to be exercising a strong influence on some
theological currents and, through them, on pastoral practice, like to emphasize that the
fundamental human attitude is that of seeking the infinite, a seeking that never attains its object. In
theology, this view of things will state very categorically that faith is not certainty but questioning,
not clarity but a leap in the dark.
These currents of thought certainly have the advantage of reminding us that faith concerns things
not yet in our possession, since they are hoped for; that as yet we see only "in a mirror
dimly"; and that God dwells always in inaccessible light. They help us to make the
Christian faith not the attitude of one who has already arrived, but a journey forward as with
Abraham. For all the more reason one must avoid presenting as certain things which are not.
However, we must not fall into the opposite extreme, as too often happens. The Letter to the
Hebrews says that "faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not
seen." Although we are not in full possession, we do have an assurance and a conviction.
When educating children, adolescents and young people, let us not give them too negative an
idea of faith - as if it were absolute non-knowing, a kind of blindness, a world of darkness - but let
us show them that the humble yet courageous seeking of the believer, far from having its starting
point in nothingness, in plain self-deception, in fallible opinions or in uncertainty, is based on the
Word of God who cannot deceive or be deceived, and is unceasingly built on the immovable rock
of this Word. It is the search of the Magi under the guidance of a star, the search of which
Pascal, taking up a phrase of St. Augustine, wrote so profoundly: "You would not be searching for
me, if you had not found me."
It is also one of the aims of catechesis to give young catechumens the simple but solid certainties
that will help them to seek to know the Lord more and better.
Catechesis and Theology
In this context, it seems important to me that the connection between catechesis and theology
should be well understood.
Obviously this connection is profound and vital for those who understand the irreplaceable mission
of theology in the service of Faith. Thus it is no surprise that every stirring in the field of theology
also has repercussions in that of catechesis. In this period immediately after the Council, the
Church is living through an important but hazardous time of theological research. The same must
be said of hermeneutics with respect to exegesis.
Synod fathers from all continents dealt with this question in very frank terms: they spoke of the
danger of an "unstable balance" passing from theology to catechesis and they stressed the need
to do something about this difficulty. Pope Paul VI himself had dealt with the problem in no less
frank terms in the introduction to his Solemn Profession of Faith and in the apostolic
exhortation marking the fifth anniversary of the close of the Second Vatican Council.
This point must again be insisted on. Aware of the influence that their research and their
statements have on catechetical instruction, theologians and exegetes have a duty to take great
care that people do not take for a certainty what on the contrary belongs to the area of questions
of opinion or of discussion among experts. Catechists for their part must have the wisdom to pick
from the field of theological research those points that can provide light for their own reflection and
their teaching, drawing, like the theologians, from the true sources, in the light of the magisterium.
They must refuse to trouble the minds of the children and young people, at this stage of their
catechesis, with outlandish theories, useless questions and unproductive discussions, things that
St. Paul often condemned in his pastoral letters.
The most valuable gift that the Church can offer to the bewildered and restless world of our time is
to form within it Christians who are confirmed in what is essential and who are humbly joyful in
their faith. Catechesis will teach this to them, and it will itself be the first to benefit from it: "The
man who wishes to understand himself thoroughly - and not just in accordance with immediate,
partial, often superficial, and even illusory standards and measures of his being - must come to
Christ with his unrest and uncertainty, and even his weakness and sinfulness, his life and death.
He must, so to speak, enter into Christ with all his own self, he must `appropriate' Christ and
assimilate the whole of the reality of the Incarnation and redemption in order to find himself."
IX.
THE TASK CONCERNS US ALL
Encouragement to All Responsible for Catechesis
Now, beloved brothers and sons and daughters, I would like my words, which are intended as
a serious and heartfelt exhortation from me in my ministry as pastor of the universal Church, to set
your hearts aflame, like the letters of St. Paul to his companions in the Gospel, Titus and Timothy,
or like St. Augustine writing for the deacon Deogratias, when the latter lost heart before his task as
a catechist, a real little treatise on the joy of catechizing. Yes, I wish to sow courage, hope
and enthusiasm abundantly in the hearts of all those many diverse people who are in charge of
religious instruction and training for life in keeping with the Gospel.
Bishops
To begin with, I turn to my brother Bishops: The Second Vatican Council has already explicitly
reminded you of your task in the catechetical area, and the fathers of the fourth general
assembly of the synod have also strongly underlined it.
Dearly beloved brothers, you have here a special mission within your Churches: You are beyond
all others the ones primarily responsible for catechesis, the catechists par excellence. Together
with the Pope, in the spirit of episcopal collegiality, you too have charge of catechesis throughout
the Church. Accept therefore what I say to you from my heart.
I know that your ministry as Bishops is growing daily more complex and overwhelming. A
thousand duties call you: from the training of new priests to being actively present within the lay
communities, from the living, worthy celebration of the sacraments and acts of worship to concern
for human advancement and the defense of human rights. But let the concern to foster active and
effective catechesis yield to no other care whatever in any way. This concern will lead you to
transmit personally to your faithful the doctrine of life. But it should also lead you to take on in your
diocese, in accordance with the plans of the episcopal conference to which you belong, the chief
management of catechesis, while at the same time surrounding yourselves with competent and
trustworthy assistants. Your principal role will be to bring about and maintain in your Churches a
real passion for catechesis, a passion embodied in a pertinent and effective organization, putting
into operation the necessary personnel, means and equipment, and also financial resources. You
can be sure that if catechesis is done well in your local Churches, everything else will be easier to
do. And needless to say, although your zeal must sometimes impose upon you the thankless task
of denouncing deviations and correcting errors, it will much more often win for you the joy and
consolation of seeing your Churches flourishing because catechesis is given in them as the Lord
wishes.
Priests
For your part, priests, here you have a field in which you are the immediate assistants of your
Bishops. The Council has called you "instructors in the faith"; there is no better way for you to
be such instructors than by devoting your best efforts to the growth of your communities in the
faith. Whether you are in charge of a parish, or are chaplains to primary or secondary schools or
universities, or have responsibility for pastoral activity at any level, or are leaders of large or small
communities, especially youth groups, the Church expects you to neglect nothing with a view to a
well-organized and well-oriented catechetical effort. The deacons and other ministers that you may
have the good fortune to have with you are your natural assistants in this. All believers have a right
to catechesis; all pastors have the duty to provide it. I shall always ask civil leaders to respect the
freedom of catechetical teaching; but with all my strength I beg you, ministers of Jesus Christ: Do
not, for lack of zeal or because of some unfortunate preconceived idea, leave the faithful without
catechesis. Let it not be said that "the children beg for food, but no one gives to them."
Men and Women Religious
Many religious institutes for men and women came into being for the purpose of giving
Christian education to children and young people, especially the most abandoned. Throughout
history, men and women religious have been deeply committed to the Church's catechetical
activity, doing particularly apposite and effective work. At a time when it is desired that the links
between religious and pastors should be accentuated and consequently the active presence of
religious communities and their members in the pastoral projects of the local Churches, I
wholeheartedly exhort you, whose religious consecration should make you even more readily
available for the Church's service, to prepare as well as possible for the task of catechesis
according to the differing vocations of your institutes and the missions entrusted to you, and to
carry this concern everywhere. Let the communities dedicate as much as possible of what ability
and means they have to the specific work of catechesis.
Lay Catechists
I am anxious to give thanks in the Church's name to all of you, lay teachers of catechesis in
the parishes, the men and the still more numerous women throughout the world who are devoting
yourselves to the religious education of many generations. Your work is often lowly and hidden but
it is carried out with ardent and generous zeal, and it is an eminent form of the lay apostolate, a
form that is particularly important where for various reasons children and young people do not
receive suitable religious training in the home. How many of us have received from people like you
our first notions of catechism and our preparation for the sacrament of Penance, for our first
Communion and Confirmation! The fourth general assembly of the synod did not forget you. I join
with it in encouraging you to continue your collaboration for the life of the Church.
But the term "catechists" belongs above all to the catechists in mission lands. Born of families that
are already Christian or converted at some time to Christianity and instructed by missionaries or
by another catechist, they then consecrate their lives, year after year, to catechizing children and
adults in their own country. Churches that are flourishing today would not have been built up
without them. I rejoice at the efforts made by the Sacred Congregation for the Evangelization of
Peoples to improve more and more the training of these catechists. I gratefully recall the memory
of those whom the Lord has already called to Himself. I beg the intercession of those whom my
predecessors have raised to the glory of the altars. I wholeheartedly encourage those engaged in
the work. I express the wish that many others may succeed them and that they may increase in
numbers for a task so necessary for the missions.
In the Parish
I now wish to speak of the actual setting in which all these catechists normally work. I am
returning this time, taking a more overall view, to the "places" for catechesis, some of which have
already been mentioned in I: the parish, the family, the school, organizations.
It is true that catechesis can be given anywhere, but I wish to stress, in accordance with the desire
of very many Bishops, that the parish community must continue to be the prime mover and preeminent place for catechesis. Admittedly, in many countries the parish has been as it were shaken
by the phenomenon of urbanization. Perhaps some have too easily accepted that the parish
should be considered old-fashioned, if not doomed to disappear, in favor of more pertinent and
effective small communities. Whatever one may think, the parish is still a major point of reference
for the Christian people, even for the non-practicing. Accordingly, realism and wisdom demand
that we continue along the path aiming to restore to the parish, as needed, more adequate
structures and, above all a new impetus through the increasing integration into it of qualified,
responsible and generous members. This being said and taking into account the necessary
diversity of places for catechesis (the parish as such, families taking in children and adolescents,
chaplaincies for State schools, Catholic educational establishments, apostolic movements that
give periods of catechesis, clubs open to youth in general, spiritual formation weekends, etc.), it is
supremely important that all these catechetical channels should really converge on the same
confession of faith, on the same membership of the Church, and on commitments in society lived
in the same Gospel spirit: "one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father." That is
why every big parish or every group of parishes with small numbers has the serious duty to train
people completely dedicated to providing catechetical leadership (priests, men and women
religious, and lay people), to provide the equipment needed for catechesis under all aspects, to
increase and adapt the places for catechesis to the extent that it is possible and useful to do so,
and to be watchful about the quality of the religious formation of the various groups and their
integration into the ecclesial community.
In short, without monopolizing or enforcing uniformity, the parish remains, as I have said, the preeminent place for catechesis. It must rediscover its vocation, which is to be a fraternal and
welcoming family home, where those who have been baptized and confirmed become aware of
forming the People of God. In that home, the bread of good doctrine and the Eucharistic Bread are
broken for them in abundance, in the setting of the one act of worship; from that home they
are sent out day by day to their apostolic mission in all the centers of activity of the life of the
world.
In the Family
The family's catechetical activity has a special character, which is in a sense irreplaceable.
This special character has been rightly stressed by the Church, particularly by the Second Vatican
Council. Education in the faith by parents, which should begin from the children's tenderest
age, is already being given when the members of a family help each other to grow in faith
through the witness of their Christian lives, a witness that is often without words but which
perseveres throughout a day-to-day life lived in accordance with the Gospel. This catechesis is
more incisive when, in the course of family events (such as the reception of the sacraments, the
celebration of great liturgical feasts, the birth of a child, a bereavement) care is taken to explain in
the home the Christian or religious content of these events. But that is not enough: Christian
parents must strive to follow and repeat, within the setting of family life, the more methodical
teaching received elsewhere. The fact that these truths about the main questions of faith and
Christian living are thus repeated within a family setting impregnated with love and respect will
often make it possible to influence the children in a decisive way for life. The parents themselves
profit from the effort that this demands of them, for in a catechetical dialogue of this sort each
individual both receives and gives.
Family catechesis therefore precedes, accompanies and enriches all other forms of catechesis.
Furthermore, in places where anti- religious legislation endeavors even to prevent education in the
faith, and in places where widespread unbelief or invasive secularism makes real religious growth
practically impossible, "the church of the home" remains the one place where children and
young people can receive an authentic catechesis. Thus there cannot be too great an effort on the
part of Christian parents to prepare for this ministry of being their own children's catechists and to
carry it out with tireless zeal. Encouragement must also be given to the individuals or institutions
that, through person-to-person contacts, through meetings, and through all kinds of pedagogical
means, help parents to perform their task: The service they are doing to catechesis is beyond
price.
At School
Together with and in connection with the family, the school provides catechesis with
possibilities that are not to be neglected. In the unfortunately decreasing number of countries in
which it is possible to give education in the faith within the school framework, the Church has the
duty to do so as well as possible. This of course concerns first and foremost the Catholic school: it
would no longer deserve this title if, no matter how much it shone for its high level of teaching in
non-religious matters, there were justification for reproaching it for negligence or deviation in
strictly religious education. Let it not be said that such education will always be given implicitly and
indirectly. The special character of the Catholic school, the underlying reason for it, the reason
why Catholic parents should prefer it, is precisely the quality of the religious instruction integrated
into the education of the pupils. While Catholic establishments should respect freedom of
conscience, that is to say, avoid burdening consciences from without by exerting physical or moral
pressure, especially in the case of the religious activity of adolescents, they still have a grave duty
to offer a religious training suited to the often widely varying religious situations of the pupils. They
also have a duty to make them understand that, although God's call to serve Him in spirit and
truth, in accordance with the Commandments of God and the precepts of the Church, does not
apply constraint, it is nevertheless binding in conscience.
But I am also thinking of non-confessional and public schools. I express the fervent wish that, in
response to a very clear right of the human person and of the family, and out of respect for
everyone's religious freedom, all Catholic pupils may be enabled to advance in their spiritual
formation with the aid of a religious instruction dependent on the Church, but which, according to
the circumstances of different countries, can be offered either by the school or in the setting of the
school, or again within the framework of an agreement with the public authorities regarding school
timetables, if catechesis takes place only in the parish or in another pastoral center. In fact, even
in places where objective difficulties exist, it should be possible to arrange school timetables in
such a way as to enable the Catholics to deepen their faith and religious experience, with qualified
teachers, whether priests or lay people.
Admittedly, apart from the school, many other elements of life help in influencing the mentality of
the young, for instance, recreation, social background and work surroundings. But those who
study are bound to bear the stamp of their studies, to be introduced to cultural or moral values
within the atmosphere of the establishment in which they are taught, and to be faced with many
ideas met with in school. It is important for catechesis to take full account of this effect of the
school on the pupils, if it is to keep in touch with the other elements of the pupil's knowledge and
education; thus the Gospel will impregnate the mentality of the pupils in the field of their learning,
and the harmonization of their culture will be achieved in the light of faith. Accordingly, I give
encouragement to the priests, religious and lay people who are devoting themselves to sustaining
these pupils' faith. This is moreover an occasion for me to reaffirm my firm conviction that to show
respect for the Catholic faith of the young to the extent of facilitating its education, its implantation,
its consolidation, its free profession and practice would certainly be to the honor of any
government, whatever be the system on which it is based or the ideology from which it draws its
inspiration.
Within Organizations
Lastly, encouragement must be given to the lay associations, movements and groups, whether
their aim is the practice of piety, the direct apostolate, charity and relief work, or a Christian
presence in temporal matters. They will all accomplish their objectives better, and serve the
Church better, if they give an important place in their internal organization and their method of
action to the serious religious training of their members. In this way every association of the faithful
in the Church has by definition the duty to educate in the faith.
This makes more evident the role given to the laity in catechesis today, always under the pastoral
direction of their Bishops, as the propositions left by the synod stressed several times.
Training Institutes
We must be grateful to the Lord for this contribution by the laity, but it is also a challenge to our
responsibility as pastors, since these lay catechists must be carefully prepared for what is, if not a
formally instituted ministry, at the very least a function of great importance in the Church. Their
preparation calls on us to organize special centers and institutes, which are to be given assiduous
attention by the Bishops. This is a field in which diocesan, interdiocesan or national cooperation
proves fertile and fruitful. Here also the material aid provided by the richer Churches to their poor
sisters can show the greatest effectiveness, for what better assistance can one Church give to
another than to help it to grow as a Church with its own strength?
I would like to recall to all those who are working generously in the service of the Gospel, and to
whom I have expressed here my lively encouragement, the instruction given by my venerated
predecessor Paul VI: "As evangelizers, we must offer... the image of people who are mature in
faith and capable of finding a meeting-point beyond the real tensions, thanks to a shared, sincere
and disinterested search for truth. Yes, the destiny of evangelization is certainly bound up with the
witness of unity given by the Church. This is a source of responsibility and also of comfort."
CONCLUSION
The Holy Spirit, the Teacher Within
At the end of this apostolic exhortation, the gaze of my heart turns to Him who is the principle
inspiring all catechetical work and all who do this work-the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, the
Holy Spirit.
In describing the mission that this Spirit would have in the Church, Christ used the significant
words: "He will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to
you." And He added: "When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth...he
will declare to you the things that are to come."
The Spirit is thus promised to the Church and to each Christian as a teacher within, who, in the
secret of the conscience and the heart, makes one understand what one has heard but was not
capable of grasping: "Even now the Holy Spirit teaches the faithful," said St. Augustine in this
regard, "in accordance with each one's spiritual capacity. And he sets their hearts aflame with
greater desire according as each one progresses in the charity that makes him love what he
already knows and desire what he has yet to know."
Furthermore, the Spirit's mission is also to transform the disciples into witnesses to Christ: "He will
bear witness to me; and you also are witnesses."
But this is not all. For St. Paul, who on this matter synthesizes a theology that is latent throughout
the New Testament, it is the whole of one's "being a Christian," the whole of the Christian life, the
new life of the children of God, that constitutes a life in accordance with the Spirit. Only the
Spirit enables us to say to God: "Abba, Father." Without the Spirit we cannot say: "Jesus is
Lord." From the Spirit come all the charisms that build up the Church, the community of
Christians.
In keeping with this, St. Paul gives each disciple of Christ the instruction: "Be filled with the
Spirit." St. Augustine is very explicit: "Both (our believing and our doing good) are ours
because of the choice of our will, and yet both are gifts from the Spirit of faith and charity."
Catechesis, which is growth in faith and the maturing of Christian life towards its fullness, is
consequently a work of the Holy Spirit, a work that He alone can initiate and sustain in the Church.
This realization, based on the text quoted above and on many other passages of the New
Testament, convinces us of two things.
To begin with, it is clear that, when carrying out her mission of giving catechesis, the Church-and
also every individual Christian devoting himself to that mission within the Church and in her namemust be very much aware of acting as a living, pliant instrument of the Holy Spirit. To invoke this
Spirit constantly, to be in communion with Him, to endeavor to know His authentic inspirations
must be the attitude of the teaching Church and of every catechist.
Secondly, the deep desire to understand better the Spirit's action and to entrust oneself to Him
more fully - at a time when "in the Church we are living an exceptionally favorable season of the
Spirit," as my predecessor Paul VI remarked in his Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii nuntiandi -
must bring about a catechetical awakening. For "renewal in the Spirit" will be authentic and will
have real fruitfulness in the Church, not so much according as it gives rise to extraordinary
charisms, but according as it leads the greatest possible number of the faithful, as they travel their
daily paths, to make a humble, patient and persevering effort to know the mystery of Christ better
and better, and to bear witness to it.
I invoke on the catechizing Church this Spirit of the Father and the Son, and I beg Him to renew
catechetical dynamism in the Church.
Mary, Mother and Model of the Disciple
May the Virgin of Pentecost obtain this for us through her intercession. By a unique vocation,
she saw her Son Jesus "increase in wisdom and in stature, and in favor." As He sat on her
lap and later as He listened to her throughout the hidden life at Nazareth, this Son, who was "the
only Son from the Father," "full of grace and truth," was formed by her in human knowledge of the
Scriptures and of the history of God's plan for His people, and in adoration of the Father. She
in turn was the first of His disciples. She was the first in time, because even when she found her
adolescent Son in the temple she received from Him lessons that she kept in her heart. She
was the first disciple above all else because no one has been "taught by God" to such depth.
She was "both mother and disciple," as St. Augustine said of her, venturing to add that her
discipleship was more important for her than her motherhood. There are good grounds for
the statement made in the synod hall that Mary is "a living catechism" and "the mother and model
of catechists."
May the presence of the Holy Spirit, through the prayers of Mary, grant the Church unprecedented
enthusiasm in the catechetical work that is essential for her. Thus will she effectively carry out, at
this moment of grace, her inalienable and universal mission, the mission given her by her Teacher:
"Go therefore and make disciples of all nations."
With my apostolic blessing.
