Christ is alive! He is our hope, and in a wonderful way he brings youth to our world, and
everything he touches becomes young, new, full of life. The very first words, then, that I would like
to say to every young Christian are these: Christ is alive and he wants you to be alive!
He is in you, he is with you and he never abandons you. However far you may wander, he is
always there, the Risen One. He calls you and he waits for you to return to him and start over
again. When you feel you are growing old out of sorrow, resentment or fear, doubt or failure, he
will always be there to restore your strength and your hope.
With great affection, I address this Apostolic Exhortation to all Christian young people. It is
meant to remind you of certain convictions born of our faith, and at the same time to encourage
you to grow in holiness and in commitment to your personal vocation. But since it is also part of a
synodal process, I am also addressing this message to the entire People of God, pastors and
faithful alike, since all of us are challenged and urged to reflect both on the young and for the
young. Consequently, I will speak to young people directly in some places, while in others I will
propose some more general considerations for the Church’s discernment.
I have let myself be inspired by the wealth of reflections and conversations that emerged from
last year’s Synod. I cannot include all those contributions here, but you can read them in the Final
Document. In writing this letter, though, I have attempted to summarize those proposals I
considered most significant. In this way, my words will echo the myriad voices of believers the
world over who made their opinions known to the Synod. Those young people who are not
believers, yet wished to share their thoughts, also raised issues that led me to ask new questions.
What does the word of God have to say about young people?
Let us draw upon some of the richness of the sacred Scriptures, since they often speak of
young people and of how the Lord draws near to encounter them.
In the Old Testament
In an age when young people were not highly regarded, some texts show that God sees them
differently. Joseph, for example, was one of the youngest of his family, yet God
showed him great things in dreams and when about twenty years old he outshone all his brothers
in important affairs.
In Gideon, we see the frankness of young people, who are not used to sugar-coating reality.
When told that the Lord was with him, he responded: “But if the Lord is with us, why then have all
these things happened to us?”. God was not offended by that reproach, but went on to
order him: “Go in this might of yours and deliver Israel!”.
Samuel was still a young boy, yet the Lord spoke to him. Thanks to the advice of an adult, he
opened his heart to hear God’s call: “Speak, Lord, for your servant is listening”. As
a result, he became a great prophet who intervened at critical moments in the history of his
country. King Saul was also young when the Lord called him to undertake his mission.
King David was chosen while still a boy. When the prophet Samuel was seeking the future king
of Israel, a man offered as candidates his sons who were older and more experienced. Yet the
prophet said that the chosen one was the young David, who was out tending the flock , for “man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart” The
glory of youth is in the heart, more than in physical strength or the impression given to others.
Solomon, when he had to succeed his father, felt lost and told God: “I am a mere youth, not
knowing at all how to act”. Yet the audacity of youth moved him to ask God for wisdom
and he devoted himself to his mission. Something similar happened to the prophet Jeremiah,
called despite his youth to rouse his people. In his fear, he said: “Ah, Lord God! Truly I do not
know how to speak, for I am only a youth”. But the Lord told him not to say that, and added: “Do not be afraid of them,
for I am with you to deliver you”. The devotion
of the prophet Jeremiah to his mission shows what can happen when the brashness of youth is
joined to the power of God.
A Jewish servant girl of the foreign commander Naaman intervened with faith and helped him
to be cured of his illness . The young Ruth was a model of generosity in remaining
beside her mother-in-law who had fallen on hard times, yet she also showed
boldness in getting ahead in life.
In the New Testament
One of Jesus’ parables  relates that a “younger” son wanted to leave his
father’s home for a distant land. Yet his thoughts of independence turned into
dissolution and excess, and he came to experience the bitterness of loneliness and
poverty. Nonetheless, he found the strength to make a new start and
determined to get up and return home. Young hearts are naturally ready to change, to
turn back, get up and learn from life. How could anyone fail to support that son in this new
resolution? Yet his older brother already had a heart grown old; he let himself be possessed by
greed, selfishness and envy. Jesus praises the young sinner who returned to the
right path over the brother who considered himself faithful, yet lacked the spirit of love and mercy.
Jesus, himself eternally young, wants to give us hearts that are ever young. God’s word asks
us to “cast out the old leaven that you may be fresh dough”. Saint Paul invites us to
strip ourselves of the “old self” and to put on a “young” self. In explaining what it
means to put on that youthfulness “which is being renewed” , he mentions “compassion,
kindness, humility, meekness and patience, bearing with one another and forgiving each other if
anyone has a complaint against another”. In a word, true youth means having a
heart capable of loving, whereas everything that separates us from others makes the soul grow
old. And so he concludes: “above all, clothe yourselves with love, which binds everything together
in perfect harmony”.
Let us also keep in mind that Jesus had no use for adults who looked down on the young or
lorded it over them. On the contrary, he insisted that “the greatest among you must become like
the youngest”. For him age did not establish privileges, and being young did not imply
lesser worth or dignity.
The word of God says that young people should be treated “as brothers”, and
warns parents not to “provoke your children, lest they become discouraged”. Young
people are not meant to become discouraged; they are meant to dream great things, to seek vast
horizons, to aim higher, to take on the world, to accept challenges and to offer the best of
themselves to the building of something better. That is why I constantly urge young people not to
let themselves be robbed of hope; to each of them I repeat: “Let no one despise your youth”.
Nonetheless, young people are also urged “to accept the authority of those who are older”. The Bible never ceases to insist that profound respect be shown to the elderly, since they
have a wealth of experience; they have known success and failure, life’s joys and afflictions, its
dreams and disappointments. In the silence of their heart, they have a store of experiences that
can teach us not to make mistakes or be taken in by false promises. An ancient sage asks us to
respect certain limits and to master our impulses: “Urge the younger men to be self-controlled”.
It is unhelpful to buy into the cult of youth or foolishly to dismiss others simply because they
are older or from another generation. Jesus tells us that the wise are able to bring forth from their
store things both new and old. A wise young person is open to the future, yet still
capable of learning something from the experience of others.
In the Gospel of Mark, we find a man who, listening to Jesus speak of the commandments,
says, “All these I have observed from my youth” . The Psalmist had already said the same
thing: “You, O Lord, are my hope; my trust, O Lord, from my youth… from my youth you have
taught me, and I still proclaim your wondrous deeds”. We should never repent of
spending our youth being good, opening our heart to the Lord, and living differently. None of this
takes away from our youth but instead strengthens and renews it: “Your youth is renewed like the
eagle’s”. For this reason, Saint Augustine could lament: “Late have I loved you, beauty
ever ancient, ever new! Late have I loved you!” Yet that rich man, who had been faithful to God
in his youth, allowed the passing years to rob his dreams; he preferred to remain attached to his
riches.
On the other hand, in the Gospel of Matthew we find a young man who
approaches Jesus and asks if there is more that he can do ; in this, he demonstrates that
youthful openness of spirit which seeks new horizons and great challenges. Yet his spirit was not
really that young, for he had already become attached to riches and comforts. He said he wanted
something more, but when Jesus asked him to be generous and distribute his goods, he realized
that he could not let go of everything he had. In the end, “hearing these words, the young man
went away sad” He had given up his youth.
The Gospel also speaks about a group of wise young women, who were ready and waiting,
while others were distracted and slumbering. We can, in fact, spend our youth
being distracted, skimming the surface of life, half-asleep, incapable of cultivating meaningful
relationships or experiencing the deeper things in life. In this way, we can store up a paltry and
unsubstantial future. Or we can spend our youth aspiring to beautiful and great things, and thus
store up a future full of life and interior richness.
If you have lost your inner vitality, your dreams, your enthusiasm, your optimism and your
generosity, Jesus stands before you as once he stood before the dead son of the widow, and with
all the power of his resurrection he urges you: “Young man, I say to you, arise!”.
To be sure, many other passages of the word of God can shed light on this stage of your life.
We will take up some of them in the following chapters.
Jesus, ever young
Jesus is “young among the young in order to be an example for the young and to consecrate
them to the Lord”. For this reason the Synod said that “youth is an original and stimulating stage
of life, which Jesus himself experienced, thereby sanctifying it”.
Jesus’ youth
The Lord “gave up his spirit”  on a cross when he was little more than thirty years
of age. It is important to realize that Jesus was a young person. He gave his life when
he was, in today’s terms, a young adult. He began his public mission in the prime of life, and thus
“a light dawned”  that would shine most brightly when he gave his life to the very end.
That ending was not something that simply happened; rather, his entire youth, at every moment,
was a precious preparation for it. “Everything in Jesus’s life was a sign of his mystery”; indeed,
“Christ’s whole life is a mystery of redemption”.
The Gospel tells us nothing of Jesus’ childhood, but it does recount several events of his
adolescence and youth. Matthew situates the time of the Lord’s youth between two events: his
family’s return to Nazareth after their exile, and Jesus’ baptism in the Jordan, the beginning of his
public ministry. The last images we have of Jesus as a child are those of a tiny refugee in Egypt
 and repatriated in Nazareth. Our first image of Jesus as a young
adult shows him standing among the crowds on the banks of the Jordan river to be baptized by his
kinsman John the Baptist, just like any other member of his people.
Jesus’ baptism was not like our own, which introduces us to the life of grace, but a
consecration prior to his embarking on the great mission of his life. The Gospel says that at his
baptism the Father rejoiced and was well pleased: “You are my beloved Son”. Jesus
immediately appeared filled with the Holy Spirit, and was led by the Spirit into the desert. There he
prepared to go forth to preach and to work miracles, to bring freedom and healing.
Every young person who feels called to a mission in this world is invited to hear the Father
speaking those same words within his or her heart: “You are my beloved child”.
Between these two accounts, we find another, which shows Jesus as an adolescent, when he
had returned with his parents to Nazareth, after being lost and found in the Temple
There we read that “he was obedient to them” ; he did not disown his family. Luke
then adds that Jesus “grew in wisdom, age and grace before God and men”. In a
word, this was a time of preparation, when Jesus grew in his relationship with the Father and with
others. Saint John Paul II explained that he did not only grow physically, but that “there was also a
spiritual growth in Jesus”, because “the fullness of grace in Jesus was in proportion to his age:
there was always a fullness, but a fullness which increased as he grew in age”.
From what the Gospel tells us, we can say that Jesus, in the years of his youth, was “training”,
being prepared to carry out the Father’s plan. His adolescence and his youth set him on the path
to that sublime mission.
In his adolescence and youth, Jesus’ relationship with the Father was that of the beloved Son.
Drawn to the Father, he grew up concerned for his affairs: “Did you not know that I must be about
my Father’s business?”. Still, it must not be thought that Jesus was a withdrawn
adolescent or a self-absorbed youth. His relationships were those of a young person who shared
fully in the life of his family and his people. He learned his father’s trade and then replaced him as
a carpenter. At one point in the Gospel he is called “the carpenter’s son”  and another
time simply “the carpenter”. This detail shows that he was just another young person of
his town, who related normally to others. No one regarded him as unusual or set apart from
others. For this very reason, once Jesus began to preach, people could not imagine where he got
this wisdom: “Is this not Joseph’s son?”.
In fact, “Jesus did not grow up in a narrow and stifling relationship with Mary and Joseph, but
readily interacted with the wider family, the relatives of his parents and their friends”. Hence we
can understand why, when he returned from his pilgrimage to Jerusalem, his parents readily
thought that, as a twelve-year-old boy, he was wandering freely among the crowd,
even though they did not see him for an entire day: “supposing him to be in the group of travellers,
they went a day’s journey”. Surely, they assumed, Jesus was there, mingling with the
others, joking with other young people, listening to the adults tell stories and sharing the joys and
sorrows of the group. Indeed, the Greek word that Luke uses to describe the group – synodía –
clearly evokes a larger “community on a journey” of which the Holy Family is a part. Thanks to the
trust of his parents, Jesus can move freely and learn to journey with others.
His youth teaches us
These aspects of Jesus’ life can prove inspiring for all those young people who are developing
and preparing to take up their mission in life. This involves growing in a relationship with the
Father, in awareness of being part of a family and a people, and in openness to being filled with
the Holy Spirit and led to carry out the mission God gives them, their personal vocation. None of
this should be overlooked in pastoral work with young people, lest we create projects that isolate
young people from their family and the larger community, or turn them into a select few, protected
from all contamination. Rather, we need projects that can strengthen them, accompany them and
impel them to encounter others, to engage in generous service, in mission.
Jesus does not teach you, young people, from afar or from without, but from within your very
youth, a youth he shares with you. It is very important for you to contemplate the young Jesus as
presented in the Gospels, for he was truly one of you, and shares many of the features of your
young hearts. We see this for example in the following: “Jesus had unconditional trust in the
Father; he maintained friendship with his disciples, and even in moments of crisis he remained
faithful to them. He showed profound compassion for the weakest, especially the poor, the sick,
sinners and the excluded. He had the courage to confront the religious and political authorities of
his time; he knew what it was to feel misunderstood and rejected; he experienced the fear of
suffering and he knew the frailty of the Passion. He turned his gaze to the future, entrusting
himself into the Father’s safe hands in the strength of the Spirit. In Jesus, all the young can see
themselves”.
On the other hand, Jesus is risen, and he wants to make us sharers in the new life of the
resurrection. He is the true youthfulness of a world grown old, the youthfulness of a universe
waiting “in travail”  to be clothed with his light and to live his life. With him at our side,
we can drink from the true wellspring that keeps alive all our dreams, our projects, our great
ideals, while impelling us to proclaim what makes life truly worthwhile. Two curious details in the
Gospel of Mark show how those risen with Christ are called to authentic youth. In the Lord’s
passion we see a young man who wanted to follow Jesus, but in fear ran away naked;
he lacked the strength to stake everything on following the Lord. Yet at the empty tomb, we
see another young person, “dressed in a white tunic” , who tells the women not to be afraid
and proclaims the joy of the resurrection.
The Lord is calling us to enkindle stars in the night of other young people. He asks you to look
to the true stars, all those varied signs he gives us to guide our way, and to imitate the farmer who
watches the stars before going out to plough his field. God lights up stars to help us keep walking:
“The stars shine in their watches, and are glad; he calls them and they say: ‘Here we are!’”. Christ himself is our great light of hope and our guide in the night, for he is the “bright
morning star”.
The youth of the Church
Youth is more than simply a period of time; it is a state of mind. That is why an institution as
ancient as the Church can experience renewal and a return to youth at different points in her ageold history. Indeed, at the most dramatic moments of her history, she feels called to return with all
her heart to her first love. Recalling this truth, the Second Vatican Council noted that, “enriched by
a long and living history, and advancing towards human perfection in time and the ultimate
destinies of history and of life, the Church is the real youth of the world”. In her, it is always
possible to encounter Christ “the companion and friend of youth”.
A Church open to renewal
Let us ask the Lord to free the Church from those who would make her grow old, encase her in
the past, hold her back or keep her at a standstill. But let us also ask him to free her from another
temptation: that of thinking she is young because she accepts everything the world offers her,
thinking that she is renewed because she sets her message aside and acts like everybody else.
No! The Church is young when she is herself, when she receives ever anew the strength born of
God’s word, the Eucharist, and the daily presence of Christ and the power of his Spirit in our lives.
The Church is young when she shows herself capable of constantly returning to her source.
Certainly, as members of the Church, we should not stand apart from others. All should regard
us as friends and neighbours, like the apostles, who “enjoyed the good will of all the people”. Yet at the same time we must dare to be different, to point to ideals other
than those of this world, testifying to the beauty of generosity, service, purity, perseverance,
forgiveness, fidelity to our personal vocation, prayer, the pursuit of justice and the common good,
love for the poor, and social friendship.
Christ’s Church can always yield to the temptation to lose enthusiasm because she no longer
hears the Lord calling her to take the risk of faith, to give her all without counting the dangers; she
can be tempted to revert to seeking a false, worldly form of security. Young people can help keep
her young. They can stop her from becoming corrupt; they can keep her moving forward, prevent
her from being proud and sectarian, help her to be poorer and to bear better witness, to take the
side of the poor and the outcast, to fight for justice and humbly to let herself be challenged. Young
people can offer the Church the beauty of youth by renewing her ability to “rejoice with new
beginnings, to give unreservedly of herself, to be renewed and to set out for ever greater
accomplishments”.
Those of us who are no longer young need to find ways of keeping close to the voices and
concerns of young people. “Drawing together creates the conditions for the Church to become a
place of dialogue and a witness to life-giving fraternity”. We need to make more room for the
voices of young people to be heard: “listening makes possible an exchange of gifts in a context of
empathy… At the same time, it sets the conditions for a preaching of the Gospel that can touch
the heart truly, decisively and fruitfully”.
A Church attentive to the signs of the times
“Even though to many young people, God, religion and the Church seem empty words, they
are sensitive to the figure of Jesus when he is presented in an attractive and effective way”.
Consequently, the Church should not be excessively caught up in herself but instead, and above
all, reflect Jesus Christ. This means humbly acknowledging that some things concretely need to
change, and if that is to happen, she needs to appreciate the vision but also the criticisms of
young people.
The Synod recognized that “a substantial number of young people, for all sorts of reasons, do
not ask the Church for anything because they do not see her as significant for their lives. Some
even ask expressly to be left alone, as they find the presence of the Church a nuisance, even an
irritant. This request does not always stem from uncritical or impulsive contempt. It can also have
serious and understandable reasons: sexual and financial scandals; a clergy ill-prepared to
engage effectively with the sensitivities of the young; lack of care in homily preparation and the
presentation of the word of God; the passive role assigned to the young within the Christian
community; the Church’s difficulty in explaining her doctrine and ethical positions to contemporary
society”.
Although many young people are happy to see a Church that is humble yet confident in her
gifts and capable of offering fair and fraternal criticism, others want a Church that listens more,
that does more than simply condemn the world. They do not want to see a Church that is silent
and afraid to speak, but neither one that is always battling obsessively over two or three issues. To
be credible to young people, there are times when she needs to regain her humility and simply
listen, recognizing that what others have to say can provide some light to help her better
understand the Gospel. A Church always on the defensive, which loses her humility and stops
listening to others, which leaves no room for questions, loses her youth and turns into a museum.
How, then, will she be able to respond to the dreams of young people? Even if she possesses the
truth of the Gospel, this does not mean that she has completely understood it; rather, she is called
to keep growing in her grasp of that inexhaustible treasure.
For example, a Church that is overly fearful and tied to its structures can be invariably critical
of efforts to defend the rights of women, and constantly point out the risks and the potential errors
of those demands. Instead, a living Church can react by being attentive to the legitimate claims of
those women who seek greater justice and equality. A living Church can look back on history and
acknowledge a fair share of male authoritarianism, domination, various forms of enslavement,
abuse and sexist violence. With this outlook, she can support the call to respect women’s rights,
and offer convinced support for greater reciprocity between males and females, while not agreeing
with everything some feminist groups propose. Along these lines, the Synod sought to renew the
Church’s commitment “against all discrimination and violence on sexual grounds”. That is the
response of a Church that stays young and lets herself be challenged and spurred on by the
sensitivities of young people.
Mary, the young woman of Nazareth
In the heart of the Church, Mary shines forth. She is the supreme model for a youthful Church
that seeks to follow Christ with enthusiasm and docility. While still very young, she accepted the
message of the angel, yet she was not afraid to ask questions. With open heart and
soul, she replied, “Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord”.
“We are always struck by the strength of the young Mary’s ‘yes’, the strength in those words,
‘be it done’, that she spoke to the angel. This was no merely passive or resigned acceptance, or a
faint ‘yes’, as if to say, ‘Well, let’s give it a try and see what happens’. Mary did not know the
words, ‘Let’s see what happens’. She was determined; she knew what was at stake and she said
‘yes’ without thinking twice. Hers was the ‘yes’ of someone prepared to be committed, someone
willing to take a risk, ready to stake everything she had, with no more security than the certainty of
knowing that she was the bearer of a promise. So I ask each one of you: do you see yourselves as
the bearers of a promise? What promise is present in my heart that I can take up? Mary’s mission
would undoubtedly be difficult, but the challenges that lay ahead were no reason to say ‘no’.
Things would get complicated, of course, but not in the same way as happens when cowardice
paralyzes us because things are not clear or sure in advance. Mary did not take out an insurance
policy! She took the risk, and for this reason she is strong, she is an ‘influencer’, the ‘influencer’ of
God. Her ‘yes and her desire to serve were stronger than any doubts or difficulties’”.
Without yielding to evasions or illusions, “she accompanied the suffering of her Son; she
supported him by her gaze and protected him with her heart. She shared his suffering, yet was not
overwhelmed by it. She was the woman of strength who uttered her ‘yes’, who supports and
accompanies, protects and embraces. She is the great guardian of hope… From her, we learn
how to say ‘yes’ to the stubborn endurance and creativity of those who, undaunted, are ever ready
to start over again”.
Mary was a young woman whose heart overflowed with joy, whose eyes,
reflecting the light of the Holy Spirit, looked at life with faith and treasured all things in her youthful
heart. She was energetic, ready to set out immediately once she knew that her
cousin needed her. She did not think about her own plans, but went “with haste” to the hill country.
When her young son needed protection, Mary set out with Joseph to a distant land. She also joined the disciples in awaiting the outpouring of the Holy Spirit.
In her presence, a young Church was born, as the apostles went forth to give birth to a new world.
Today, Mary is the Mother who watches over us, her children, on our journey through life,
often weary and in need, anxious that the light of hope not fail. For that is our desire: that the light
of hope never fail. Mary our Mother looks to this pilgrim people: a youthful people whom she loves,
and who seek her in the silence of their hearts amid all the noise, the chatter and the distractions
of the journey. Under the gaze of our Mother, there is room only for the silence of hope. Thus Mary
illumines anew our youth.
Young saints
The heart of the Church is also full of young saints who devoted their lives to Christ, many of
them even to dying a martyr’s death. They were precious reflections of the young Christ; their
radiant witness encourages us and awakens us from our lethargy. The Synod pointed out that
“many young saints have allowed the features of youth to shine forth in all their beauty, and in their
day they have been real prophets of change. Their example shows what the young are capable of,
when they open themselves up to encounter Christ”. [Through the holiness of the young, the Church can renew her spiritual ardour and her
apostolic vigor. The balm of holiness generated by the good lives of so many young people can
heal the wounds of the Church and of the world, bringing us back to that fullness of love to which
we have always been called: young saints inspire us to return to our first love ”.
Some saints never reached adulthood, yet they showed us that there is another way to spend our
youth. Let us recall at least some of them who, each in his or her own way, and at different periods
of history, lived lives of holiness.
In the third century, Saint Sebastian was a young captain of the Praetorian Guard. It is said
that he spoke constantly of Christ and tried to convert his companions, to the point that he was
ordered to renounce his faith. Since he refused, he was shot with arrows, yet he survived and
continued to proclaim Christ fearlessly. In the end, Sebastian was flogged to death.
Saint Francis of Assisi, while very young and full of great dreams, heard Jesus’ call to become
poor like him and to rebuild the Church by his witness. He joyfully renounced everything he had
and is now the saint of universal fraternity, the brother of all. He praised the Lord for his creatures.
Francis died in Saint Joan of Arc was born in She was a young peasant girl who, despite her tender
years, fought to defend France from invaders. Misunderstood for her demeanour, her actions and
her way of living the faith, Joan was burned at the stake.
Blessed Andrew Phû Yên was a young Vietnamese man of the seventeenth century. He was a
catechist and assisted the missionaries. He was imprisoned for his faith, and since he refused to
renounce it, he was killed. Andrew died uttering the name of Jesus.
In that same century, Saint Kateri Tekakwitha, a young native of North America, was
persecuted for her faith and, to escape, walked over three hundred kilometres in the wilderness.
Kateri consecrated herself to God and died saying: “Jesus, I love you!”
Saint Dominic Savio offered all his sufferings to Mary. When Saint John Bosco taught him that
holiness involves being constantly joyful, he opened his heart to a contagious joy. He wanted to be
close to the most abandoned and infirm of his fellow young people. Dominic died in at
fourteen years of age, saying: “What a wondrous thing I am experiencing!”
Saint Thérèse of the Child Jesus was born in At fifteen years of age, having overcome
many difficulties, she succeeded in entering the Carmelite convent. Thérèse lived the little way of
complete trust in the Lord’s love and determined to fan with her prayers the fire of love burning in
the heart of the Church.
Blessed Ceferino Namuncurá was a young Argentinian, the son of the chief of a remote tribe
of indigenous peoples. He became a Salesian seminarian, filled with the desire to return to his
tribe, bringing Jesus Christ to them. Ceferino died in Blessed Isidore Bakanja was a layman from the Congo who bore witness to his faith. He was
tortured at length for having proposed Christianity to other young people. Forgiving his
executioner, Isidore died in Blessed Pier Giorgio Frassati, who died in, “was a young man filled with a joy that swept
everything along with it, a joy that also overcame many difficulties in his life”. Pier Giorgio said
that he wanted to return the love of Jesus that he received in Holy Communion by visiting and
helping the poor.
Blessed Marcel Callo was a young French man who died in Marcel was imprisoned in a
concentration camp in Austria, where he strengthened his fellow prisoners in faith amid harsh
labors.
The young Blessed Chiara Badano, who died in , “experienced how pain could be
transfigured by love… The key to her peace and joy was her complete trust in the Lord and the
acceptance of her illness as a mysterious expression of his will for her sake and that of
others”.
May these and so many other young people who perhaps in silence and hiddenness lived the
Gospel to the full, intercede for the Church, so that she may be full of joyous, courageous and
committed young people who can offer the world new testimonies of holiness.
You are the “now” of God
After this brief look at the word of God, we cannot just say that young people are the future of
our world. They are its present; even now, they are helping to enrich it. Young people are no
longer children. They are at a time of life when they begin to assume a number of responsibilities,
sharing alongside adults in the growth of the family, society and the Church. Yet the times are
changing, leading us to ask: What are today’s young people really like? What is going on in their
lives?
In positive terms
The Synod recognized that the members of the Church do not always take the approach of
Jesus. Rather than listening to young people attentively, “all too often, there is a tendency to
provide prepackaged answers and ready-made solutions, without allowing their real questions to
emerge and facing the challenges they pose”. Yet once the Church sets aside narrow
preconceptions and listens carefully to the young, this empathy enriches her, for “it allows young
people to make their own contribution to the community, helping it to appreciate new sensitivities
and to consider new questions”.
We adults can often be tempted to list all the problems and failings of today’s young people.
Perhaps some will find it praiseworthy that we seem so expert in discerning difficulties and
dangers. But what would be the result of such an attitude? Greater distance, less closeness, less
mutual assistance.
Anyone called to be a parent, pastor or guide to young people must have the farsightedness to
appreciate the little flame that continues to burn, the fragile reed that is shaken but not broken. The ability to discern pathways where others only see walls, to recognize potential where
others see only peril. That is how God the Father see things; he knows how to cherish and nurture
the seeds of goodness sown in the hearts of the young. Each young person’s heart should thus be
considered “holy ground”, a bearer of seeds of divine life, before which we must “take off our
shoes” in order to draw near and enter more deeply into the Mystery.
Many ways of being young
We might attempt to draw a picture of young people today, but first I would echo the Synod
Fathers, who noted that “the makeup of the Synod brought out the presence and contribution of
many different regions of the world, and highlighted the beauty of our being a universal Church. In
a context of growing globalization, the Synod Fathers wanted the many differences of contexts
and cultures, even within individual countries, to be duly emphasized. The worlds of today’s ‘youth’
are so many that in some countries one tends to speak of ‘young people’ in the plural. The age
group considered by the Synod (- years) does not represent a homogeneous category, but is
composed of distinct groups, each with its own life experience”.
From a demographic standpoint too, some countries have many young people, whereas
others have a very low birth rate. “A further differentiating factor is historical: there are countries
and continents of ancient Christian tradition, whose culture is indelibly marked by a memory that
cannot be lightly dismissed, while other countries and continents are characterized by other
religious traditions, where Christianity is a minority presence – and at times a recent one. In other
places still, Christian communities, and young people who belong to them, experience
persecution”. There is also a need to distinguish young people “with access to the growing
opportunities offered by globalization from those who live on the fringes of society or in rural areas,
and find themselves excluded or discarded”.
There are many more differences, which it would be difficult to examine here. In any event, I
see no need for a detailed analysis of today’s young people, their lives and their experiences. At
the same time, since I do not want to neglect that reality, I will briefly summarize some
contributions received before the Synod and others that I heard in the course of our meetings.
Some experiences of young people
Youth is not something to be analyzed in the abstract. Indeed, “youth” does not exist: there
exist only young people, each with the reality of his or her own life. In today’s rapidly changing
world, many of those lives are exposed to suffering and manipulation.
Living in a world in crisis
The Synod Fathers acknowledged with sorrow that “many young people today live in war
zones and experience violence in countless different forms: kidnapping, extortion, organized
crime, human trafficking, slavery and sexual exploitation, wartime rape, and so forth. Other young
people, because of their faith, struggle to find their place in society and endure various kinds of
persecution, even murder. Many young people, whether by force or lack of alternatives, live by
committing crimes and acts of violence: child soldiers, armed criminal gangs, drug trafficking,
terrorism, and so on. This violence destroys many young lives. Abuse and addiction, together with
violence and wrongdoing, are some of the reasons that send young people to prison, with a higher
incidence in certain ethnic and social groups”.
Many young people are taken in by ideologies, used and exploited as cannon fodder or a
strike force to destroy, terrify or ridicule others. Worse yet, many of them end up as individualists,
hostile and distrustful of others; in this way, they become an easy target for the brutal and
destructive strategies of political groups or economic powers.
“Even more numerous in the world are young people who suffer forms of marginalization and
social exclusion for religious, ethnic or economic reasons. Let us not forget the difficult situation of
adolescents and young people who become pregnant, the scourge of abortion, the spread of HIV,
various forms of addiction (drugs, gambling, pornography and so forth), and the plight of street
children without homes, families or economic resources”. In the case of women, these
situations are doubly painful and difficult.
As a Church, may we never fail to weep before these tragedies of our young. May we never
become inured to them, for anyone incapable of tears cannot be a mother. We want to weep so
that society itself can be more of a mother, so that in place of killing it can learn to give birth, to
become a promise of life. We weep when we think of all those young people who have already lost
their lives due to poverty and violence, and we ask society to learn to be a caring mother. None of
this pain goes away; it stays with us, because the harsh reality can no longer be concealed. The
worst thing we can do is adopt that worldly spirit whose solution is simply to anaesthetize young
people with other messages, with other distractions, with trivial pursuits.
Perhaps “those of us who have a reasonably comfortable life don’t know how to weep. Some
realities in life are only seen with eyes cleansed by tears. I would like each of you to ask yourself
this question: Can I weep? Can I weep when I see a child who is starving, on drugs or on the
street, homeless, abandoned, mistreated or exploited as a slave by society? Or is my weeping
only the self-centred whining of those who cry because they want something else?” Try to
learn to weep for all those young people less fortunate than yourselves. Weeping is also an
expression of mercy and compassion. If tears do not come, ask the Lord to give you the grace to
weep for the sufferings of others. Once you can weep, then you will be able to help others from the
heart.
At times, the hurt felt by some young people is heart-rending, a pain too deep for words. They
can only tell God how much they are suffering, and how hard it is for them to keep going, since
they no longer believe in anyone. Yet in that sorrowful plea, the words of Jesus make themselves
heard: “Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted”. Some young men and
women were able to move forward because they heard that divine promise. May all young people
who are suffering feel the closeness of a Christian community that can reflect those words by its
actions, its embrace and its concrete help.
It is true that people in power offer some assistance, but often it comes at a high price. In
many poor countries, economic aid provided by some richer countries or international agencies is
usually tied to the acceptance of Western views of sexuality, marriage, life or social justice. This
ideological colonization is especially harmful to the young. We also see how a certain kind of
advertising teaches young people to be perpetually dissatisfied and contributes to the throwaway
culture, in which young people themselves end up being discarded.
Our present-day culture exploits the image of the young. Beauty is associated with a youthful
appearance, cosmetic treatments that hide the traces of time. Young bodies are constantly
advertised as a means of selling products. The ideal of beauty is youth, but we need to realize that
this has very little to do with young people. It only means that adults want to snatch youth for
themselves, not that they respect, love and care for young people.
Some young people “find family traditions oppressive and they flee from them under the
impulse of a globalized culture that at times leaves them without points of reference. In other parts
of the world, even more than generational conflict between young people and adults, there is
mutual estrangement. Sometimes adults fail, or do not even try, to hand on the basic values of life,
or they try to imitate young people, thus inverting the relationship between generations. The
relationship between young people and adults thus risks remaining on the affective level, leaving
its educational and cultural aspects untouched”. What harm this does to young people, even
though some do not notice it! Young people themselves have remarked how enormously difficult
this makes the transmission of the faith “in some countries without freedom of speech, where
young people are prevented from attending Church”.
Desires, hurts and longings
Young people are aware that the body and sexuality have an essential importance for their
lives and for their process of growth in identity. Yet in a world that constantly exalts sexuality,
maintaining a healthy relationship with one’s body and a serene affective life is not easy. For this
and other reasons, sexual morality often tends to be a source of “incomprehension and alienation
from the Church, inasmuch as she is viewed as a place of judgment and condemnation”.
Nonetheless, young people also express “an explicit desire to discuss questions concerning the
difference between male and female identity, reciprocity between men and women, and
homosexuality”.
In our times, “advances in the sciences and in biomedical technologies have powerfully
influenced perceptions about the body, leading to the idea that it is open to unlimited modification.
The capacity to intervene in DNA, the possibility of inserting artificial elements into organisms
(cyborgs) and the development of the neurosciences represent a great resource, but at the same
time they raise serious anthropological and ethical questions”. They can make us forget that
life is a gift, and that we are creatures with innate limits, open to exploitation by those who wield
technological power. “Moreover, in some youth circles, there is a growing fascination with risktaking behaviour as a means of self-exploration, seeking powerful emotions and gaining
attention… These realities, to which young generations are exposed, are an obstacle to their
serene growth in maturity”.
Young people also experience setbacks, disappointments and profoundly painful memories.
Often they feel “the hurt of past failures, frustrated desires, experiences of discrimination and
injustice, of feeling unloved and unaccepted”. Then too “there are moral wounds, the burden of
past errors, a sense of guilt for having made mistakes”. Jesus makes his presence felt amid
these crosses borne by young people; he offers them his friendship, his consolation and his
healing companionship. The Church wants to be his instrument on this path to interior healing and
peace of heart.
In some young people, we can see a desire for God, albeit still vague and far from knowledge
of the God of revelation. In others, we can glimpse an ideal of human fraternity, which is no small
thing. Many have a genuine desire to develop their talents in order to offer something to our world.
In some, we see a special artistic sensitivity, or a yearning for harmony with nature. In others,
perhaps, a great need to communicate. In many of them, we encounter a deep desire to live life
differently. In all of this, we can find real starting points, inner resources open to a word of
incentive, wisdom and encouragement.
The Synod dealt in particular with three areas of utmost importance. Here I would like to quote
its conclusions, while recognizing that they call for greater analysis and the development of a more
adequate and effective ability to respond.
The digital environment
“The digital environment is characteristic of the contemporary world. Broad swathes of
humanity are immersed in it in an ordinary and continuous manner. It is no longer merely a
question of ‘using’ instruments of communication, but of living in a highly digitalized culture that
has had a profound impact on ideas of time and space, on our self-understanding, our
understanding of others and the world, and our ability to communicate, learn, be informed and
enter into relationship with others. An approach to reality that privileges images over listening and
reading has influenced the way people learn and the development of their critical sense”.
The web and social networks have created a new way to communicate and bond. They are “a
public square where the young spend much of their time and meet one another easily, even
though not all have equal access to it, particularly in some regions of the world. They provide an
extraordinary opportunity for dialogue, encounter and exchange between persons, as well as
access to information and knowledge. Moreover, the digital world is one of social and political
engagement and active citizenship, and it can facilitate the circulation of independent information
providing effective protection for the most vulnerable and publicizing violations of their rights. In
many countries, the internet and social networks already represent a firmly established forum for
reaching and involving young people, not least in pastoral initiatives and activities”.
Yet to understand this phenomenon as a whole, we need to realize that, like every human
reality, it has its share of limitations and deficiencies. It is not healthy to confuse communication
with mere virtual contact. Indeed, “the digital environment is also one of loneliness, manipulation,
exploitation and violence, even to the extreme case of the ‘dark web’. Digital media can expose
people to the risk of addiction, isolation and gradual loss of contact with concrete reality, blocking
the development of authentic interpersonal relationships. New forms of violence are spreading
through social media, for example cyberbullying. The internet is also a channel for spreading
pornography and the exploitation of persons for sexual purposes or through gambling”.
It should not be forgotten that “there are huge economic interests operating in the digital world,
capable of exercising forms of control as subtle as they are invasive, creating mechanisms for the
manipulation of consciences and of the democratic process. The way many platforms work often
ends up favoring encounter between persons who think alike, shielding them from debate. These
closed circuits facilitate the spread of fake news and false information, fomenting prejudice and
hate. The proliferation of fake news is the expression of a culture that has lost its sense of truth
and bends the facts to suit particular interests. The reputation of individuals is put in jeopardy
through summary trials conducted online. The Church and her pastors are not exempt from this
phenomenon”.
A document prepared on the eve of the Synod by three hundred young people worldwide
pointed out that “online relationships can become inhuman. Digital spaces blind us to the
vulnerability of another human being and prevent us from our own self-reflection. Problems like
pornography distort a young person’s perception of human sexuality. Technology used in this way
creates a delusional parallel reality that ignores human dignity”. For many people, immersion
in the virtual world has brought about a kind of “digital migration”, involving withdrawal from their
families and their cultural and religious values, and entrance into a world of loneliness and of selfinvention, with the result that they feel rootless even while remaining physically in one place. The
fresh and exuberant lives of young people who want to affirm their personality today confront a
new challenge: that of interacting with a real and virtual world that they enter alone, as if setting
foot on an undiscovered global continent. Young people today are the first to have to effect this
synthesis between what is personal, what is distinctive to their respective cultures, and what is
global. This means that they must find ways to pass from virtual contact to good and healthy
communication.
Migrants as an epitome of our time
How can we fail to think of all those young people affected by movements of migration?
“Migration, considered globally, is a structural phenomenon, and not a passing emergency. It may
occur within one country or between different countries. The Church’s concern is focused
especially on those fleeing from war, violence, political or religious persecution, from natural
disasters including those caused by climate change, and from extreme poverty. Many of them are
young. In general, they are seeking opportunities for themselves and their families. They dream of
a better future and they want to create the conditions for achieving it”. Migrants “remind us of a
basic aspect of our faith, that we are ‘strangers and exiles on the earth’ ”.
Other migrants are “attracted by Western culture, sometimes with unrealistic expectations that
expose them to grave disappointments. Unscrupulous traffickers, frequently linked to drug cartels
or arms cartels, exploit the weakness of migrants, who too often experience violence, trafficking,
psychological and physical abuse and untold sufferings on their journey. Nor must we overlook the
particular vulnerability of migrants who are unaccompanied minors, or the situation of those
compelled to spend many years in refugee camps, or of those who remain trapped for a long time
in transit countries, without being able to pursue a course of studies or to use their talents. In some
host countries, migration causes fear and alarm, often fomented and exploited for political ends.
This can lead to a xenophobic mentality, as people close in on themselves, and this needs to be
addressed decisively”.
“Young migrants experience separation from their place of origin, and often a cultural and
religious uprooting as well. Fragmentation is also felt by the communities they leave behind, which
lose their most vigorous and enterprising elements, and by families, especially when one or both
of the parents migrates, leaving the children in the country of origin. The Church has an important
role as a point of reference for the young members of these divided families. However, the stories
of migrants are also stories of encounter between individuals and between cultures. For the
communities and societies to which they come, migrants bring an opportunity for enrichment and
the integral human development of all. Initiatives of welcome involving the Church have an
important role from this perspective; they can bring new life to the communities capable of
undertaking them”.
“Given the varied backgrounds of the Synod Fathers, the discussion of migrants benefited
from a great variety of approaches, particularly from countries of departure and countries of arrival.
Grave concern was also expressed by Churches whose members feel forced to escape war and
persecution and by others who see in these forced migrations a threat to their survival. The very
fact that the Church can embrace all these varied perspectives allows her to play a prophetic role
in society with regard to the issue of migration”. In a special way, I urge young people not to
play into the hands of those who would set them against other young people, newly arrived in their
countries, and who would encourage them to view the latter as a threat, and not possessed of the
same inalienable dignity as every other human being.
Ending every form of abuse
Recently, urgent appeals have been made for us to hear the cry of the victims of different
kinds of abuse perpetrated by some bishops, priests, religious and laypersons. These sins cause
their victims “sufferings that can last a lifetime and that no repentance can remedy. This
phenomenon is widespread in society and it also affects the Church and represents a serious
obstacle to her mission”.
It is true that “the scourge of the sexual abuse of minors is, and historically has been, a
widespread phenomenon in all cultures and societies”, especially within families and in various
institutions; its extent has become known primarily “thanks to changes in public opinion”. Even so,
this problem, while it is universal and “gravely affects our societies as a whole… is in no way less
monstrous when it takes place within the Church”. Indeed, “in people’s justified anger, the Church
sees the reflection of the wrath of God, betrayed and insulted”.
“The Synod reaffirms the firm commitment made to adopting rigorous preventative measures
intended to avoid the recurrence [of these crimes], starting with the selection and formation of
those to whom tasks of responsibility and education will be entrusted”. At the same time, the
determination to apply the “actions and sanctions that are so necessary” must be reiterated.
And all this with the grace of Christ. There can be no turning back.
“Abuse exists in various forms: the abuse of power, the abuse of conscience, sexual and
financial abuse. Clearly, the ways of exercising authority that make all this possible have to be
eradicated, and the irresponsibility and lack of transparency with which so many cases have been
handled have to be challenged. The desire to dominate, lack of dialogue and transparency, forms
of double life, spiritual emptiness, as well as psychological weaknesses, are the terrain on which
corruption thrives”. Clericalism is a constant temptation on the part of priests who see “the
ministry they have received as a power to be exercised, rather than a free and generous service to
be offered. It makes us think that we belong to a group that has all the answers and no longer
needs to listen or has anything to learn”. Doubtless, such clericalism can make consecrated
persons lose respect for the sacred and inalienable worth of each person and of his or her
freedom.
Together with the Synod Fathers, I wish to thank, with gratitude and affection, “those who had
the courage to report the evil they experienced: they help the Church to acknowledge what
happened and the need to respond decisively”. Particular gratitude is also due for “the
generous commitment of countless lay persons, priests, consecrated men and women, and
bishops who daily devote themselves with integrity and dedication to the service of the young.
Their efforts are like a great forest that quietly grows. Many of the young people present at the
Synod also expressed gratitude to those who have accompanied them and they emphasized the
great need for adults who can serve as points of reference”.
. Thank God, those who committed these horrible crimes are not the majority of priests, who
carry out their ministry with fidelity and generosity. I ask young people to let themselves be
inspired by this vast majority. And if you see a priest at risk, because he has lost the joy of his
ministry, or seeks affective compensation, or is taking the wrong path, remind him of his
commitment to God and his people, remind him of the Gospel and urge him to hold to his course.
In this way, you will contribute greatly to something fundamental: preventing these atrocities from
being repeated. This dark cloud also challenges all young people who love Jesus Christ and his
Church: they can be a source of great healing if they employ their great capacity to bring about
renewal, to urge and demand consistent witness, to keep dreaming and coming up with new
ideas.
Nor is this the only sin of the members of the Church; her long history is not without its
shadows. Our sins are before the eyes of everyone; they appear all too clearly in the lines on the
age-old face of the Church, our Mother and Teacher. For two thousand years she has advanced
on her pilgrim way, sharing “the joys and the hopes, the grief and anguish” of all humanity. She
has made this journey as she is, without cosmetic surgery of any kind. She is not afraid to reveal
the sins of her members, which some try at times to hide, before the burning light of the word of
the Gospel, which cleanses and purifies. Nor does she stop reciting each day, in shame: “Have
mercy on me, Lord, in your kindness… my sin is always before me”. Still, let us never
forget that we must not abandon our Mother when she is wounded, but stand beside her, so that
she can summon up all her strength and all her ability to begin ever anew.
In the midst of this tragedy, which rightly pains us, “the Lord Jesus, who never abandons his
Church, offers her the strength and the means to set out on a new path”. This dark moment,
“not without the valuable help of the young, can truly be an opportunity for a reform of epochmaking significance”, opening us to a new Pentecost and inaugurating a new stage of
purification and change capable of renewing the Church’s youth. Young people will be all the more
helpful if they feel fully a part of the “holy and patient, faithful People of God, borne up and
enlivened by the Holy Spirit”, for “it will be precisely this holy People of God to liberate us from the
plague of clericalism, which is the fertile ground for all these disgraces”.
A way out
In this chapter, I have taken time to look at the reality of young people in today’s world. Some
other aspects will be dealt with in the following chapters. As I have said, I do not claim to be
exhaustive in this analysis. I encourage communities to examine, respectfully and seriously, the
situation of their young people, in order to find the most fitting ways of providing them with pastoral
care. At the same time, I do not want to end this chapter without addressing some words to each
of you.
I remind you of the good news we received as a gift on the morning of the resurrection: that in
all the dark or painful situations that we mentioned, there is a way out. For example, it is true that
the digital world can expose you to the risk of self-absorption, isolation and empty pleasure. But
don’t forget that there are young people even there who show creativity and even genius. That
was the case with the Venerable Carlo Acutis.
Carlo was well aware that the whole apparatus of communications, advertising and social
networking can be used to lull us, to make us addicted to consumerism and buying the latest thing
on the market, obsessed with our free time, caught up in negativity. Yet he knew how to use the
new communications technology to transmit the Gospel, to communicate values and beauty.
Carlo didn’t fall into the trap. He saw that many young people, wanting to be different, really
end up being like everyone else, running after whatever the powerful set before them with the
mechanisms of consumerism and distraction. In this way they do not bring forth the gifts the Lord
has given them; they do not offer the world those unique personal talents that God has given to
each of them. As a result, Carlo said, “everyone is born as an original, but many people end up
dying as photocopies”. Don’t let that happen to you!
Don’t let them rob you of hope and joy, or drug you into becoming a slave to their interests.
Dare to be more, because who you are is more important than any possession. What good are
possessions or appearances? You can become what God your Creator knows you are, if only you
realize that you are called to something greater. Ask the help of the Holy Spirit and confidently aim
for the great goal of holiness. In this way, you will not be a photocopy. You will be fully yourself.
If this is to happen, you need to realize one basic truth: being young is not only about
pursuing fleeting pleasures and superficial achievements. If the years of your youth are to serve
their purpose in life, they must be a time of generous commitment, whole-hearted dedication, and
sacrifices that are difficult but ultimately fruitful. As a great poet put it:
“If to regain what I regained,
I first had to lose what I lost;
If to achieve what I achieved,
I had to endure what I endured;
If to be in love now
First I had to be hurt,
I consider what I suffered well suffered,
I consider what I wept for as well wept for.
Because in the end I came to see
That we do not really enjoy what we enjoyed
Unless we have suffered for it.
For in the end I realized
That the blossoms on the tree
Draw life from what lies buried beneath”.
If you are young in years, but feel weak, weary or disillusioned, ask Jesus to renew you. With
him, hope never fails. You can do the same if you feel overwhelmed by vices, bad habits,
selfishness or unhealthy pastimes. Jesus, brimming with life, wants to help you make your youth
worthwhile. In this way, you will not deprive the world of the contribution that you alone can make,
in all your uniqueness and originality.
Yet let me also remind you that, “when we live apart from others, it is very difficult to fight
against concupiscence, the snares and temptations of the devil, and the selfishness of the world.
Bombarded as we are by so many enticements, we can grow too isolated, lose our sense of reality
and inner clarity, and easily succumb”. This is especially the case with young people, for
whenever you are united, you have marvelous strength. Whenever you are enthused about life in
common, you are capable of great sacrifices for others and for the community. Isolation, on the
other hand, saps our strength and exposes us to the worst evils of our time.
A great message for all young people
Putting all else aside, I now wish to speak to young people about what is essential, the one
thing we should never keep quiet about. It is a message containing three great truths that all of us
need constantly to keep hearing.
A God who is love
The very first truth I would tell each of you is this: “God loves you”. It makes no difference
whether you have already heard it or not. I want to remind you of it. God loves you. Never doubt
this, whatever may happen to you in life. At every moment, you are infinitely loved.
Perhaps your experience of fatherhood has not been the best. Your earthly father may have
been distant or absent, or harsh and domineering. Or maybe he was just not the father you
needed. I don’t know. But what I can tell you, with absolute certainty, is that you can find security
in the embrace of your heavenly Father, of the God who first gave you life and continues to give it
to you at every moment. He will be your firm support, but you will also realize that he fully respects
your freedom.
In God’s word, we find many expressions of his love. It is as if he tried to find different ways
of showing that love, so that, with one of them at least, he could touch your heart. For example,
there are times when God speaks of himself as an affectionate father who plays with his children:
“I led them with cords of compassion, with bands of love. I was to them like those who lift infants to
their cheeks”.
At other times, he speaks of himself as filled with the love of a mother whose visceral love for her
children makes it impossible for her to neglect or abandon them: “Can a woman forget her nursing
child, or show no compassion for the child of her womb? Even these may forget, yet I will not
forget you”.
He even compares himself to a lover who goes so far as to write his beloved on the palm of his
hands, to keep her face always before him: “See, I have inscribed you on the palms of my hands!”.
At other times, he emphasizes the strength and steadfastness of his invincible love: “For the
mountains may depart, and the hills be shaken, but my steadfast love shall not depart from you,
and my covenant of peace shall not be shaken”.
Or he tells us that we have been awaited from eternity, for it was not by chance that we came into
this world: “I have loved you with an everlasting love; therefore I have continued my faithfulness to
you”.
Or he lets us know that he sees in us a beauty that no one else can see: “For you are precious in
my sight, and honored, and I love you”.
Or he makes us realize that his love is not cheerless, but pure joy, welling up whenever we allow
ourselves to be loved by him: “The Lord, your God, is in your midst, a warrior who gives victory.
He will rejoice over you with gladness, he will renew you in his love; he will exult over you with
loud singing”.
For him, you have worth; you are not insignificant. You are important to him, for you are the
work of his hands. That is why he is concerned about you and looks to you with affection. “Trust
the memory of God: his memory is not a ‘hard disk’ that ‘saves’ and ‘archives’ all our data. His
memory is a heart filled with tender compassion, one that finds joy in ‘deleting’ from us every trace
of evil”. He does not keep track of your failings and he always helps you learn something even
from your mistakes. Because he loves you. Try to keep still for a moment and let yourself feel his
love. Try to silence all the noise within, and rest for a second in his loving embrace.
His is “a love that does not overwhelm or oppress, cast aside or reduce to silence, humiliate
or domineer. It is the love of the Lord, a daily, discreet and respectful love; a love that is free and
freeing, a love that heals and raises up. The love of the Lord has to do more with raising up than
knocking down, with reconciling than forbidding, with offering new changes than condemning, with
the future than the past”.
When he asks something of you, or simply makes you face life’s challenges, he is hoping that
you will make room for him to push you, to help you grow. He does not get upset if you share your
questions with him. He is concerned when you don’t talk to him, when you are not open to
dialogue with him. The Bible tells us that Jacob fought with God, but that did
not keep him from persevering in his journey. The Lord himself urges us: “Come, let us argue it
out”. His love is so real, so true, so concrete, that it invites us to a relationship of
openness and fruitful dialogue. Seek the closeness of our heavenly Father in the loving face of his
courageous witnesses on earth!
Christ saves you
The second great truth is that Christ, out of love, sacrificed himself completely in order to
save you. His outstretched arms on the cross are the most telling sign that he is a friend who is
willing to stop at nothing: “Having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end”.
Saint Paul said that his life was one of complete trust in that self-sacrificing love: “I now live by
faith in the Son of God who loved me, and gave himself for me”.
The same Christ who, by his cross, saved us from our sins, today continues to save and
redeem us by the power of his total self-surrender. Look to his cross, cling to him, let him save
you, for “those who accept his offer of salvation are set free from sin, sorrow, inner emptiness and
loneliness”. And if you sin and stray far from him, he will come to lift you up by the power of his
cross. Never forget that “he forgives us seventy times seven. Time and time again, he bears us on
his shoulders. No one can strip us of the dignity bestowed upon us by this boundless and unfailing
love. With a tenderness that never disappoints but is always capable of restoring our joy, he
makes it possible for us to lift up our heads and to start anew”.
“We are saved by Jesus because he loves us and cannot go against his nature. We can do
any number of things against him, yet he loves us and he saves us. For only what is loved can be
saved. Only what is embraced can be transformed. The Lord’s love is greater than all our
problems, frailties and flaws. Yet it is precisely through our problems, frailties and flaws that he
wants to write this love story. He embraced the prodigal son, he embraced Peter after his denials,
and he always, always, always embraces us after every fall, helping us to rise and get back on our
feet. Because the worst fall, and pay attention to this, the worst fall, the one that can ruin our lives,
is when we stay down and do not allow ourselves to be helped up”.
His forgiveness and salvation are not something we can buy, or that we have to acquire by
our own works or efforts. He forgives us and sets us free without cost. His self-sacrifice on the
cross is so great that we can never repay it, but only receive it with immense gratitude and with the
joy of being more greatly loved than we could ever imagine: “He loved us first”.
Young people, beloved of the Lord, how valuable must you be if you were redeemed by the
precious blood of Christ! Dear young people, “you are priceless! You are not up for sale! Please,
do not let yourselves be bought. Do not let yourselves be seduced. Do not let yourselves be
enslaved by forms of ideological colonization that put ideas in your heads, with the result that you
end up becoming slaves, addicts, failures in life. You are priceless. You must repeat this always: I
am not up for sale; I do not have a price. I am free! Fall in love with this freedom, which is what
Jesus offers”.
Keep your eyes fixed on the outstretched arms of Christ crucified, let yourself be saved over
and over again. And when you go to confess your sins, believe firmly in his mercy which frees you
of your guilt. Contemplate his blood poured out with such great love, and let yourself be cleansed
by it. In this way, you can be reborn ever anew.
He is alive!
Finally, there is a third truth, inseparable from the second: Christ is alive! We need to keep
reminding ourselves of this, because we can risk seeing Jesus Christ simply as a fine model from
the distant past, as a memory, as someone who saved us two thousand years ago. But that would
be of no use to us: it would leave us unchanged, it would not set us free. The one who fills us with
his grace, the one who liberates us, transforms us, heals and consoles us is someone fully alive.
He is the Christ, risen from the dead, filled with supernatural life and energy, and robed in
boundless light. That is why Saint Paul could say: “If Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile”.
Alive, he can be present in your life at every moment, to fill it with light and to take away all
sorrow and solitude. Even if all others depart, he will remain, as he promised: “I am with you
always, to the end of the age”. He fills your life with his unseen presence; wherever you
go, he will be waiting there for you. Because he did not only come in the past, but he comes to you
today and every day, inviting you to set out towards ever new horizons.
See Jesus as happy, overflowing with joy. Rejoice with him as with a friend who has
triumphed. They killed him, the holy one, the just one, the innocent one, but he triumphed in the
end. Evil does not have the last word. Nor will it have the last word in your life, for you have a
friend who loves you and wants to triumph in you. Your Savior lives.
Because he lives, there can be no doubt that goodness will have the upper hand in your life
and that all our struggles will prove worthwhile. If this is the case, we can stop complaining and
look to the future, for with him this is always possible. That is the certainty we have. Jesus is
eternally alive. If we hold fast to him, we will have life, and be protected from the threats of death
and violence that may assail us in life.
Every other solution will prove inadequate and temporary. It may be helpful for a time, but
once again we will find ourselves exposed and abandoned before the storms of life. With Jesus,
on the other hand, our hearts experience a security that is firmly rooted and enduring. Saint Paul
says that he wishes to be one with Christ in order “to know him and the power of his resurrection”. That power will constantly be revealed in your lives too, for he came to give you life,
“and life in abundance”.
If in your heart you can learn to appreciate the beauty of this message, if you are willing to
encounter the Lord, if you are willing to let him love you and save you, if you can make friends with
him and start to talk to him, the living Christ, about the realities of your life, then you will have a
profound experience capable of sustaining your entire Christian life. You will also be able to share
that experience with other young people. For “being a Christian is not the result of an ethical
choice or a lofty idea, but the encounter with an event, a person, which gives life a new horizon
and a decisive direction”.
The Spirit gives life
In these three truths – God loves you; Christ is your Savior; he is alive – we see God the
Father and Jesus. Wherever the Father and the Son are, there too is the Holy Spirit. He is the one
who quietly opens hearts to receive that message. He keeps alive our hope of salvation, and he
will help you grow in joy if you are open to his working. The Holy Spirit fills the heart of the risen
Christ and then flows over into your lives. When you receive the Spirit, he draws you ever more
deeply into the heart of Christ, so that you can grow in his love, his life and his power.
Ask the Holy Spirit each day to help you experience anew the great message. Why not? You
have nothing to lose, and he can change your life, fill it with light and lead it along a better path. He
takes nothing away from you, but instead helps you to find all that you need, and in the best
possible way. Do you need love? You will not find it in dissipation, using other people, or trying to
be possessive or domineering. You will find it in a way that will make you genuinely happy. Are
you seeking powerful emotions? You will not experience them by accumulating material objects,
spending money, chasing desperately after the things of this world. They will come, and in a much
more beautiful and meaningful way, if you let yourself be prompted by the Holy Spirit.
Are you looking for passion? As that beautiful poem says: “Fall in love!” (or “let yourself be
loved!”), because “nothing is more practical than finding God, than falling in love in a quite
absolute, final way. What you are in love with, what seizes your imagination, will affect everything.
It will decide what will get you out of bed in the morning, what you do with your evenings, how you
spend your weekends, what you read, whom you know, what breaks your heart, and what amazes
you with joy and gratitude. Fall in love, stay in love, and it will decide everything”. This love for
God, that can approach everything in life with passion, is possible thanks to the Spirit, for “God’s
love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us”.
He is the source of youth at its best. For those who trust in the Lord are “like a tree planted by
water sending out its roots by the stream; it shall not fear when heat comes, and its leaves shall
stay green”. While “youths shall faint and be weary”, those who wait for the
Lord “shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings like eagles, they shall run and not
be weary, they shall walk and not faint”.

Paths of youth
What does it mean to live the years of our youth in the transforming light of the Gospel? We
need to raise this question, because youth, more than a source of pride, is a gift of God: “To be
young is a grace, a blessing”. It is a gift that we can squander meaninglessly, or receive with
gratitude and live to the full.
God is the giver of youth and he is at work in the life of each young person. Youth is a
blessed time for the young and a grace for the Church and for the world. It is joy, a song of hope
and a blessing. Making the most of our youthful years entails seeing this season of life as
worthwhile in itself, and not simply as a brief prelude to adulthood.
A time of dreams and decisions
In Jesus’ day, the passage from childhood was a significant step in life, one joyfully
celebrated. When Jesus restored life to a man’s daughter, he first called her a “child”,
but then addressed her as a “young girl”. By saying to her: “Young girl, get up (talitha
cum)”, he made her more responsible for her life, opening before her the door to youth.
“Youth, as a phase in the development of the personality, is marked by dreams which gather
momentum, by relationships which acquire more and more consistency and balance, by trials and
experiments, and by choices which gradually build a life project. At this stage in life, the young are
called to move forward without cutting themselves off from their roots, to build autonomy but not in
solitude”.
The love of God and our relationship with the living Christ do not hold us back from dreaming;
they do not require us to narrow our horizons. On the contrary, that love elevates us, encourages
us and inspires us to a better and more beautiful life. Much of the longing present in the hearts of
young people can be summed up in the word “restlessness”. As Saint Paul VI said, “In the very
discontent that you often feel… a ray of light is present”. Restless discontent, combined with
exhilaration before the opening up of new horizons, generates a boldness that leads you to stand
up and take responsibility for a mission. This healthy restlessness typical of youth continues to
dwell in every heart that remains young, open and generous. True inner peace coexists with that
profound discontent. As Saint Augustine said: “You have created us for yourself, Lord, and our
hearts are restless until they find their rest in you”.
Sometime ago, a friend asked me what I see in a young person. My response was that “I see
someone who is searching for his or her own path, who wants to fly on their two feet, who faces
the world and looks at the horizon with eyes full of the future, full of hope as well as illusions. A
young person stands on two feet as adults do, but unlike adults, whose feet are parallel, he always
has one foot forward, ready to set out, to spring ahead. Always racing onward. To talk about
young people is to talk about promise and to talk about joy. Young people have so much strength;
they are able to look ahead with hope. A young person is a promise of life that implies a certain
degree of tenacity. He is foolish enough to delude himself, and resilient enough to recover from
that delusion”.
Some young people might hate this stage of life, because they want to continue being
children or indefinitely prolong their adolescence and put off having to make decisions. “Fear of
the definitive thus generates a kind of paralysis of decision-making. Yet youth cannot remain on
hold. It is the age of choices and herein lies its fascination and its greatest responsibility. Young
people make decisions in professional, social and political fields, and in other more radical ways
that determine the shape of their lives”. They also make decisions about love, choosing a
spouse and starting a family. We will look at these issues more closely in the final chapters, when
dealing with individual vocations and their discernment.
But opposed to these hopes and dreams that generate decisions, there is always the
temptation to complain or give up. “We can leave that to those who worship the ‘goddess of
lament’… She is a false goddess: she makes you take the wrong road. When everything seems to
be standing still and stagnant, when our personal issues trouble us, and social problems do not
meet with the right responses, it does no good to give up. Jesus is the way: welcome him into your
‘boat’ and put out into the deep! He is the Lord! He changes the way we see life. Faith in Jesus
leads to greater hope, to a certainty based not on our qualities and skills, but on the word of God,
on the invitation that comes from him. Without making too many human calculations, and without
worrying about things that challenge your security, put out into the deep. Go out of
yourselves”.
Keep following your hopes and dreams. But be careful about one temptation that can hold us
back. It is anxiety. Anxiety can work against us by making us give up whenever we do not see
instant results. Our best dreams are only attained through hope, patience and commitment, and
not in haste. At the same time, we should not be hesitant, afraid to take chances or make
mistakes. Avoid the paralysis of the living dead, who have no life because they are afraid to take
risks, to make mistakes or to persevere in their commitments. Even if you make mistakes, you can
always get up and start over, for no one has the right to rob you of hope.
Dear young people, make the most of these years of your youth. Don’t observe life from a
balcony. Don’t confuse happiness with an armchair, or live your life behind a screen. Whatever
you do, do not become the sorry sight of an abandoned vehicle! Don’t be parked cars, but dream
freely and make good decisions. Take risks, even if it means making mistakes. Don’t go through
life anaesthetized or approach the world like tourists. Make a ruckus! Cast out the fears that
paralyze you, so that you don’t become young mummies. Live! Give yourselves over to the best of
life! Open the door of the cage, go out and fly! Please, don’t take early retirement.
A thirst for life and experience
While drawn towards the future and its promise, young people also have a powerful desire to
experience the present moment, to make the most of the opportunities life offers. Our world is
filled with beauty! How can we look down upon God’s many gifts?
Contrary to what many people think, the Lord does not want to stifle these desires for a
fulfilling life. We do well to remember the words of an Old Testament sage: “My child, treat yourself
well, according to your means, and present your offerings to the Lord; do not deprive yourself of a
day’s enjoyment, do not let your share of desired good pass by”. The true God, who
loves you, wants you to be happy. For this reason, the Bible also contains this piece of advice to
young people: “Rejoice, young man, while you are young, and let your heart cheer you in the days
of your youth… banish anxiety from your mind”. For God “richly provides us with
everything for our enjoyment”.
How could God take pleasure in someone incapable of enjoying his small everyday
blessings, someone blind to the simple pleasures we find all around us? “No one is worse than
one who is grudging to himself”. Far from obsessively seeking new pleasures, which
would keep us from making the most of the present moment, we are asked to open our eyes and
take a moment to experience fully and with gratitude every one of life’s little gifts.
Clearly, God’s word asks you to enjoy the present, not simply to prepare for the future: “Do
not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will bring worries of its own; today’s trouble is enough for
today”. But this is not the same as embarking irresponsibly on a life of dissipation that
can only leave us empty and perpetually dissatisfied. Rather, it is about living the present to the
full, spending our energies on good things, cultivating fraternity, following Jesus and making the
most of life’s little joys as gifts of God’s love.
Cardinal Francis Xavier Nguyên Van Thuân, when imprisoned in a concentration camp,
refused to do nothing but await the day when he would be set free. He chose “to live the present
moment, filling it to the brim with love”. He decided: “I will seize the occasions that present
themselves every day; I will accomplish ordinary actions in an extraordinary way”. As you work
to achieve your dreams, make the most of each day and do your best to let each moment brim
with love. This youthful day may well be your last, and so it is worth the effort to live it as
enthusiastically and fully as possible.
This can also be applied to times of difficulty, that have to be fully experienced if we are to
learn the message they can teach us. In the words of the Swiss Bishops: “God is there where we
thought he had abandoned us and there was no further hope of salvation. It is a paradox, but for
many Christians, suffering and darkness have become… places of encounter with God”. The
desire to live fully and experience new things is also felt by many young people with physical,
mental and sensory disabilities. Even though they may not always be able to have the same
experiences as others, they possess amazing resources and abilities that are often far above
average. The Lord Jesus grants them other gifts, which the community is called to recognize and
appreciate, so that they can discover his plan of love for each of them.
In friendship with Christ
No matter how much you live the experience of these years of your youth, you will never
know their deepest and fullest meaning unless you encounter each day your best friend, the friend
who is Jesus.
Friendship is one of life’s gifts and a grace from God. Through our friends, the Lord refines us
and leads us to maturity. Faithful friends, who stand at our side in times of difficulty, are also a
reflection of the Lord’s love, his gentle and consoling presence in our lives. The experience of
friendship teaches us to be open, understanding and caring towards others, to come out of our
own comfortable isolation and to share our lives with others. For this reason, “there is nothing so
precious as a faithful friend”.
Friendship is no fleeting or temporary relationship, but one that is stable, firm and faithful, and
matures with the passage of time. A relationship of affection that brings us together and a
generous love that makes us seek the good of our friend. Friends may be quite different from one
another, but they always have things in common that draw them closer in mutual openness and
trust.
Friendship is so important that Jesus calls himself a friend: “I do not call you servants any
longer, but I call you friends”. By the gift of his grace, we are elevated in such a way
that we truly become his friends. With the same love that Christ pours out on us, we can love him
in turn and share his love with others, in the hope that they too will take their place in the
community of friendship he established. And even as he enjoys the complete bliss of the life of the
resurrection, we, for our part, can work generously to help him build his kingdom in this world, by
bringing his message, his light, and above all his love, to others. The disciples heard
Jesus calling them to be his friends. It was an invitation that did not pressure them, but gently
appealed to their freedom. “Come and see”, Jesus told them; so “they came and saw where he
was staying, and they remained with him that day”. After that unexpected and moving
encounter, they left everything and followed him.
Friendship with Jesus cannot be broken. He never leaves us, even though at times it appears
that he keeps silent. When we need him, he makes himself known to us ; he
remains at our side wherever we go. He never breaks his covenant. He simply asks
that we not abandon him: “Abide in me”. But even if we stray from him, “he remains
faithful, for he cannot deny himself”.
With a friend, we can speak and share our deepest secrets. With Jesus too, we can always
have a conversation. Prayer is both a challenge and an adventure. And what an adventure it is!
Gradually Jesus makes us appreciate his grandeur and draw nearer to him. Prayer enables us to
share with him every aspect of our lives and to rest confidently in his embrace. At the same time, it
gives us a share in his own life and love. When we pray, “we open everything we do” to him, and
we give him room “so that he can act, enter and claim victory”.
In this way, we can experience a constant closeness to him, greater than anything we can
experience with another person: “It is no longer I who live, but it is Christ who lives in me”.
Do not deprive your youth of this friendship. You will be able to feel him at your side not only
when you pray, but at every moment. Try to look for him, and you will have the beautiful
experience of seeing that he is always at your side. That is what the disciples of Emmaus
experienced when, as they walked along dejectedly, Jesus “drew near and walked with them”. In the words of a saint, “Christianity is not a collection of truths to be believed, rules to be
followed, or prohibitions. Seen that way, it puts us off. Christianity is a person who loved me
immensely, who demands and claims my love. Christianity is Christ”.
Jesus can bring all the young people of the Church together in a single dream, “a great
dream, a dream with a place for everyone. The dream for which Jesus gave his life on the cross,
for which the Holy Spirit was poured out on the day of Pentecost and brought fire to the heart of
every man and woman, to your heart and mine. To your heart too, he brought that fire, in the hope
of finding room for it to grow and flourish. A dream whose name is Jesus, planted by the Father in
the confidence that it would grow and live in every heart. A concrete dream who is a person,
running through our veins, thrilling our hearts and making them dance”.
Growth in maturity
Many young people are concerned about their bodies, trying to build up physical strength or
improve their appearance. Others work to develop their talents and knowledge, so as to feel more
sure of themselves. Some aim higher, seeking to become more involved and to grow spiritually.
Saint John said: “I write to you, young people, because you are strong and the word of God abides
in you”. Seeking the Lord, keeping his word, entrusting our life to him and growing in
the virtues: all these things make young hearts strong. That is why you need to stay connected to
Jesus, to “remain online” with him, since you will not grow happy and holy by your own efforts and
intelligence alone. Just as you try not to lose your connection to the internet, make sure that you
stay connected to the Lord. That means not cutting off dialogue, listening to him, sharing your life
with him and, whenever you aren’t sure what you should do, asking him: “Jesus, what would you
do in my place?”.
I hope that you will be serious enough about yourselves to make an effort to grow spiritually.
Along with all the other exciting things about youth, there is also the beauty of seeking
“righteousness, faith, love and peace”. This does not involve losing anything of your
spontaneity, boldness, enthusiasm and tenderness. Becoming an adult does not mean you have
to abandon what is best about this stage of your lives. If you do, the Lord may one day reproach
you: “I remember the devotion of your youth, your love as a bride, and how you followed me in the
wilderness”.
Adults, too, have to mature without losing the values of youth. Every stage of life is a
permanent grace, with its own enduring value. The experience of a youth well lived always
remains in our heart. It continues to grow and bear fruit throughout adulthood. Young people are
naturally attracted by an infinite horizon opening up before them. Adult life, with its securities
and comforts, can risk shrinking that horizon and losing that youthful excitement. The very
opposite should happen: as we mature, grow older and structure our lives, we should never lose
that enthusiasm and openness to an ever greater reality. At every moment in life, we can renew
our youthfulness. When I began my ministry as Pope, the Lord broadened my horizons and
granted me renewed youth. The same thing can happen to a couple married for many years, or to
a monk in his monastery. There are things we need to “let go of” as the years pass, but growth in
maturity can coexist with a fire constantly rekindled, with a heart ever young.
Growing older means preserving and cherishing the most precious things about our youth,
but it also involves having to purify those things that are not good and receiving new gifts from
God so we can develop the things that really matter. At times, a certain inferiority complex can
make you overlook your flaws and weaknesses, but that can hold you back from growth in
maturity. Instead, let yourself be loved by God, for he loves you just as you are. He values and
respects you, but he also keeps offering you more: more of his friendship, more fervour in prayer,
more hunger for his word, more longing to receive Christ in the Eucharist, more desire to live by
his Gospel, more inner strength, more peace and spiritual joy.
But I would also remind you that you won’t become holy and find fulfillment by copying others.
Imitating the Saints does not mean copying their lifestyle and their way of living holiness: “There
are some testimonies that may prove helpful and inspiring, but that we are not meant to copy, for
that could even lead us astray from the one specific path that the Lord has in mind for us”. You
have to discover who you are and develop your own way of being holy, whatever others may say
or think. Becoming a saint means becoming more fully yourself, becoming what the Lord wished to
dream and create, and not a photocopy. Your life ought to be a prophetic stimulus to others and
leave a mark on this world, the unique mark that only you can leave. Whereas if you simply copy
someone else, you will deprive this earth, and heaven too, of something that no one else can offer.
I think of Saint John of the Cross, who wrote in his Spiritual Canticle that everyone should benefit
from his spiritual advice “in his or her own way”, for the one God wishes to manifest his grace
“to some in one way and to others in another”.
Paths of fraternity
Your spiritual growth is expressed above all by your growth in fraternal, generous and
merciful love. Saint Paul prayed: “May the Lord make you increase and abound in love for one
another and for all”. How wonderful it would be to experience this “ecstasy” of
coming out of ourselves and seeking the good of others, even to the sacrifice of our lives.
When an encounter with God is called an “ecstasy”, it is because it takes us out of ourselves,
lifts us up and overwhelms us with God’s love and beauty. Yet we can also experience ecstasy
when we recognize in others their hidden beauty, their dignity and their grandeur as images of
God and children of the Father. The Holy Spirit wants to make us come out of ourselves, to
embrace others with love and to seek their good. That is why it is always better to live the faith
together and to show our love by living in community and sharing with other young people our
affection, our time, our faith and our troubles. The Church offers many different possibilities for
living our faith in community, for everything is easier when we do it together.
Hurts you have experienced might tempt you to withdraw from others, to turn in on yourself
and to nurse feelings of anger, but never stop listening to God’s call to forgiveness. The Bishops of
Rwanda put it well: “In order to reconcile with another person, you must first of all be able to see
the goodness in that person, the goodness God created him with... This requires great effort to
distinguish the offence from the offender; it means you hate the offence the person has committed,
but you love the person despite his weakness, because in him you see the image of God”.
There are times when all our youthful energy, dreams and enthusiasm can flag because we
are tempted to dwell on ourselves and our problems, our hurt feelings and our grievances. Don’t
let this happen to you! You will grow old before your time. Each age has its beauty, and the years
of our youth need to be marked by shared ideals, hopes and dreams, great horizons that we can
contemplate together.
God loves the joy of young people. He wants them especially to share in the joy of fraternal
communion, the sublime joy felt by those who share with others, for “it is more blessed to give
than to receive”. “God loves a cheerful giver”. Fraternal love multiplies our
ability to experience joy, since it makes us rejoice in the good of others: “Rejoice with those who
rejoice, weep with those who weep”. May your youthful spontaneity increasingly find
expression in fraternal love and a constant readiness to forgive, to be generous, and to build
community. As an African proverb says: “If you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, go
together”. Let us not allow ourselves to be robbed of fraternity.
Young and committed
At times, seeing a world so full of violence and selfishness, young people can be tempted to
withdraw into small groups, shunning the challenges and issues posed by life in society and in the
larger world. They may feel that they are experiencing fraternity and love, but their small group
may in fact become nothing other than an extension of their own ego. This is even more serious if
they think of the lay vocation simply as a form of service inside the Church: serving as lectors,
acolytes, catechists, and so forth. They forget that the lay vocation is directed above all to charity
within the family and to social and political charity. It is a concrete and faith-based commitment to
the building of a new society. It involves living in the midst of society and the world in order to bring
the Gospel everywhere, to work for the growth of peace, harmony, justice, human rights and
mercy, and thus for the extension of God’s kingdom in this world.
I ask young people to go beyond their small groups and to build “social friendship, where
everyone works for the common good. Social enmity, on the other hand, is destructive. Families
are destroyed by enmity. Countries are destroyed by enmity. The world is destroyed by enmity.
And the greatest enmity of all is war. Today we see that the world is destroying itself by war… So
find ways of building social friendship”. It is not easy, it always means having to give
something up and to negotiate, but if we do it for the sake of helping others, we can have the
magnificent experience of setting our differences aside and working together for something
greater. If, as a result of our own simple and at times costly efforts, we can find points of
agreement amid conflict, build bridges and make peace for the benefit of all, then we will
experience the miracle of the culture of encounter. This is something which young people can dare
to pursue with passion.
The Synod recognized that “albeit in a different way from earlier generations, social
commitment is a specific feature of today’s young people. Alongside some who are indifferent,
there are many others who are ready to commit themselves to initiatives of volunteer work, active
citizenship and social solidarity. They need to be accompanied and encouraged to use their
talents and skills creatively, and to be encouraged to take up their responsibilities. Social
engagement and direct contact with the poor remain fundamental ways of finding or deepening
one’s faith and the discernment of one’s vocation… It was also noted that the young are prepared
to enter political life so as to build the common good”.
Today, thank God, many young people in parishes, schools, movements and university
groups often go out to spend time with the elderly and the infirm, or to visit poor neighbourhoods,
or to meet people’s needs through “nights of charity”. Very often, they come to realize that there
they receive much more than what they give. We grow in wisdom and maturity when we take the
time to touch the suffering of others. The poor have a hidden wisdom and, with a few simple
words, they can help us discover unexpected values.
Other young people take part in social programs that build houses for the homeless, or
reclaim contaminated areas or offer various kinds of assistance to the needy. It would be helpful if
this shared energy could be channelled and organized in a more stable way and with clear goals,
so as to be even more effective. University students can apply their knowledge in an
interdisciplinary way, together with young people of other churches or religions, in order to
propose solutions to social problems.
As in the miracle of Jesus, the bread and the fish provided by young people can multiply. As in the parable, the small seeds sown by young people can yield a rich harvest
All of this has its living source in the Eucharist, in which our bread and our wine
are transformed to grant us eternal life. Young people face immense and difficult challenges. With
faith in the risen Lord, they can confront them with creativity and hope, ever ready to be of service,
like the servants at the wedding feast, who unknowingly cooperated in Jesus’ first miracle. They
did nothing more than follow the order of his Mother: “Do whatever he tells you”. Mercy,
creativity and hope make life grow.
I want to encourage all of you in this effort, because I know that “your young hearts want to
build a better world. I have been following news reports of the many young people throughout the
world who have taken to the streets to express the desire for a more just and fraternal society.
Young people taking to the streets! The young want to be protagonists of change. Please, do not
leave it to others to be protagonists of change. You are the ones who hold the future! Through
you, the future enters into the world. I ask you also to be protagonists of this transformation. You
are the ones who hold the key to the future! Continue to fight apathy and to offer a Christian
response to the social and political troubles emerging in different parts of the world. I ask you to
build the future, to work for a better world. Dear young people, please, do not be bystanders in life.
Get involved! Jesus was not a bystander. He got involved. Don’t stand aloof, but immerse
yourselves in the reality of life, as Jesus did”. Above all, in one way or another, fight for the
common good, serve the poor, be protagonists of the revolution of charity and service, capable of
resisting the pathologies of consumerism and superficial individualism.
Courageous missionaries
Filled with the love of Christ, young people are called to be witnesses of the Gospel wherever
they find themselves, by the way they live. Saint Alberto Hurtado once said that “being an apostle
does not mean wearing a lapel pin; it is not about speaking about the truth but living it, embodying
it, being transformed in Christ. Being an apostle does not mean carrying a torch in hand,
possessing the light, but being that light… The Gospel, more than a lesson, is an example. A
message that becomes a life fully lived”.
The importance of witness does not mean that we should be silent about the word. Why
should we not speak of Jesus, why should we not tell others that he gives us strength in life, that
we enjoy talking with him, that we benefit from meditating on his words? Young people, do not let
the world draw you only into things that are wrong and superficial. Learn to swim against the tide,
learn how to share Jesus and the faith he has given you. May you be moved by that same
irresistible impulse that led Saint Paul to say: “Woe to me if I do not proclaim the Gospel” !
“Where does Jesus send us? There are no borders, no limits: he sends us everywhere. The
Gospel is for everyone, not just for some. It is not only for those who seem closer to us, more
receptive, more welcoming. It is for everyone. Do not be afraid to go and bring Christ into every
area of life, to the fringes of society, even to those who seem farthest away and most indifferent.
The Lord seeks all; he wants everyone to feel the warmth of his mercy and his love”. He invites
us to be fearless missionaries wherever we are and in whatever company we find ourselves: in our
neighbourhoods, in school or sports or social life, in volunteer service or in the workplace.
Wherever we are, we always have an opportunity to share the joy of the Gospel. That is how the
Lord goes out to meet everyone. He loves you, dear young people, for you are the means by
which he can spread his light and hope. He is counting on your courage, your boldness and your
enthusiasm.
Don’t think that this mission is soft and easy. Some young people have given their lives for
the sake of missionary outreach. As the Korean bishops put it: “we hope that we can be grains of
wheat and instruments for the salvation of humanity, following upon the example of the martyrs.
Though our faith is as small as a mustard seed, God will give it growth and use it as an instrument
for his work of salvation”. Young friends, don’t wait until tomorrow to contribute your energy,
your audacity and your creativity to changing our world. Your youth is not an “in-between time”.
You are the now of God, and he wants you to bear fruit. For “it is in giving that we receive”.
The best way to prepare a bright future is to experience the present as best we can, with
commitment and generosity.
Young people with roots
I have sometimes seen young and beautiful trees, their branches reaching to the sky,
pushing ever higher, and they seemed a song of hope. Later, following a storm, I would find them
fallen and lifeless. They lacked deep roots. They spread their branches without being firmly
planted, and so they fell as soon as nature unleashed her power. That is why it pains me to see
young people sometimes being encouraged to build a future without roots, as if the world were just
starting now. For “it is impossible for us to grow unless we have strong roots to support us and to
keep us firmly grounded. It is easy to drift off, when there is nothing to clutch onto, to hold
onto”.
Don’t allow yourselves to be uprooted
This is an important issue, and I want to spend a brief chapter discussing it. If we appreciate
this issue, we can distinguish the joy of youth from a false cult of youth that can be used to seduce
and manipulate young people.
Think about it: if someone tells young people to ignore their history, to reject the experiences
of their elders, to look down on the past and to look forward to a future that he holds out, doesn’t it
then become easy to draw them along so that they only do what he tells them? He needs the
young to be shallow, uprooted and distrustful, so that they can trust only in his promises and act
according to his plans. That is how various ideologies operate: they destroy (or deconstruct) all
differences so that they can reign unopposed. To do so, however, they need young people who
have no use for history, who spurn the spiritual and human riches inherited from past generations,
and are ignorant of everything that came before them.
These masters of manipulation also use another tactic: the cult of youth, which dismisses all
that is not young as contemptible and outmoded. The youthful body becomes the symbol of this
new cult; everything associated with that body is idolized and lusted after, while whatever is not
young is despised. But this cult of youth is simply an expedient that ultimately proves degrading to
the young; it strips them of any real value and uses them for personal, financial or political profit.
Dear young friends, do not let them exploit your youth to promote a shallow life that confuses
beauty with appearances. Realize that there is beauty in the laborer who returns home grimy and
unkempt, but with the joy of having earned food for his family. There is extraordinary beauty in the
fellowship of a family at table, generously sharing what food it has. There is beauty in the wife,
slightly dishevelled and no longer young, who continues to care for her sick husband despite her
own failing health. Long after the springtime of their courtship has passed, there is beauty in the
fidelity of those couples who still love one another in the autumn of life, those elderly people who
still hold hands as they walk. There is also a beauty, unrelated to appearances or fashionable
dress, in all those men and women who pursue their personal vocation with love, in selfless
service of community or nation, in the hard work of building a happy family, in the selfless and
demanding effort to advance social harmony. To find, to disclose and to highlight this beauty,
which is like that of Christ on the cross, is to lay the foundations of genuine social solidarity and
the culture of encounter.
Along with the stratagems of a false cult of youth and appearance, we are also witnessing
attempts to promote a spirituality without God, an affectivity without community or concern for
those who suffer, a fear of the poor, viewed as dangerous, and a variety of claims to offer a future
paradise that nonetheless seems increasingly distant. I do not want to offer you any such thing,
and with great love I urge you not to let yourselves be taken in by this ideology. It will not make
you any younger, but enslave you instead. I propose another way, one born of freedom,
enthusiasm, creativity and new horizons, while at the same time cultivating the roots that nourish
and sustain us.
In this regard, I would note that “many Synod Fathers coming from non-Western contexts
pointed out that in their countries globalization is bringing with it forms of cultural colonization that
sever young people from their cultural and religious roots. The Church needs to make a
commitment to accompanying these young people, so that in the process they do not lose sight of
the most precious features of their identity”.
Today, in fact, we see a tendency to “homogenize” young people, blurring what is distinctive
about their origins and backgrounds, and turning them into a new line of malleable goods. This
produces a cultural devastation that is just as serious as the disappearance of species of animals
and plants. For this reason, in addressing young indigenous people gathered in Panama, I
encouraged them to “care for your roots, because from the roots comes the strength that is going
to make you grow, flourish and bear fruit”.
Your relationship with the elderly
At the Synod, we heard that “the young are focused on the future and they face life with
energy and dynamism. But they are also tempted… to give little attention to the memory of the
past from which they come, in particular the many gifts transmitted to them by their parents, their
grandparents and the cultural experience of the society in which they live. Helping the young to
discover the living richness of the past, to treasure its memory and to make use of it for their
choices and opportunities, is a genuine act of love towards them, for the sake of their growth and
the decisions they are called to make”.
The word of God encourages us to remain close to the elderly, so that we can benefit from
their experience: “Stand in the assembly of the elders. Who is wise? Cling to him... If you see an
intelligent man, visit him; let your foot wear out his doorstep”. In every case, the long
years they lived and all they have experienced in life should make us look to them with respect:
“You shall rise up before the hoary head”. For “the glory of young men is their
strength, but the beauty of old men is their grey hair”.
The Bible also tells us: “Listen to your father who begot you, and do not despise your mother
when she is old”. The command to honor our father and mother “is the first
commandment to carry a promise with it”, and that
promise is: “that it may be well with you and that you may live long on the earth”.
This does not mean having to agree with everything adults say or approving all their actions.
A young person should always have a critical spirit. Saint Basil the Great encouraged the young to
esteem the classical Greek authors, but to accept only whatever good they could teach. It is
really a matter of being open to receiving a wisdom passed down from generation to generation, a
wisdom familiar with human weakness and not deserving to vanish before the novelties of
consumer society and the market.
The world has never benefited, nor will it ever benefit, from a rupture between generations.
That is the siren song of a future without roots and origins. It is the lie that would have you believe
that only what is new is good and beautiful. When intergenerational relationships exist, a collective
memory is present in communities, as each generation takes up the teachings of its predecessors
and in turn bequeaths a legacy to its successors. In this way, they provide frames of reference for
firmly establishing a new society. As the old saying goes: “If the young had knowledge and the old
strength, there would be nothing they could not accomplish”.
Dreams and visions
The prophecy of Joel contains a verse that expresses this nicely: “I will pour out my Spirit
upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see
visions, and your old men shall dream dreams”. When young and old alike are
open to the Holy Spirit, they make a wonderful combination. The old dream dreams, and the
young see visions. How do the two complement one another?
The elderly have dreams built up of memories and images that bear the mark of their long
experience. If young people sink roots in those dreams, they can peer into the future; they can
have visions that broaden their horizons and show them new paths. But if the elderly do not
dream, young people lose clear sight of the horizon.
Perhaps our parents have preserved a memory that can help us imagine the dream our
grandparents dreamed for us. All of us, even before our birth, received, as a blessing from our
grandparents, a dream filled with love and hope, the dream of a better life. Even if not our
grandparents, surely some of our great-grandparents had that happy dream as they contemplated
their children and then grandchildren in the cradle. The very first dream of all is the creative dream
of God our Father, which precedes and accompanies the lives of all his children. The memory of
this blessing that extends from generation to generation is a precious legacy that we should keep
alive so that we too can pass it on.
That is why it is a good thing to let older people tell their long stories, which sometimes seem
legendary or fanciful – they are the dreams of old people – yet are often full of rich experiences, of
eloquent symbols, of hidden messages. These stories take time to tell, and we should be prepared
to listen patiently and let them sink in, even though they are much longer than what we are used to
in social media. We have to realize that the wisdom needed for life bursts the confines of our
present-day media resources.
In the book Sharing the Wisdom of Time,I expressed some thoughts in the form of
questions. “What do I ask of the elders among whom I count myself? I call us to be memory
keepers. We grandfathers and grandmothers need to form a choir. I envision elders as a
permanent choir of a great spiritual sanctuary, where prayers of supplication and songs of praise
support the larger community that works and struggles in the field of life”. It is a beautiful thing
when “young men and maidens together, old men and children, praise the name of the Lord”.
What can we elderly persons give to the young? “We can remind today’s young people, who
have their own blend of heroic ambitions and insecurities, that a life without love is an arid
life”. What can we tell them? “We can tell fearful young people that anxiety about the future
can be overcome”. What can we teach them? “We can teach those young people, sometimes
so focused on themselves, that there is more joy in giving than in receiving, and that love is not
only shown in words, but also in actions”.
Taking risks together
A love that is generous and outgoing, that acts and takes risks, may at times make mistakes.
Here we may find timely the witness of Maria Gabriella Perin, who lost her father shortly after her
birth: she reflects on how this influenced her life, in a relationship that did not last but that left her a
mother and now a grandmother. “What I know is that God makes stories. In his genius and mercy,
he takes our triumphs and our failures and weaves beautiful tapestries that are full of irony. The
reverse of the fabric may look messy with its tangled threads – the events of our life – and maybe
this is the side we dwell on when we doubt. But the right side of the tapestry displays a
magnificent story, and this is the side that God sees”. When older people look at life closely,
often they instinctively know what lies behind the tangled threads, and they recognize what God
can create even out of our mistakes.
If we journey together, young and old, we can be firmly rooted in the present, and from here,
revisit the past and look to the future. To revisit the past in order to learn from history and heal old
wounds that at times still trouble us. To look to the future in order to nourish our enthusiasm,
cause dreams to emerge, awaken prophecies and enable hope to blossom. Together, we can
learn from one another, warm hearts, inspire minds with the light of the Gospel, and lend new
strength to our hands.
Roots are not anchors chaining us to past times and preventing us from facing the present
and creating something new. Instead, they are a fixed point from which we can grow and meet
new challenges. It does us no good “to sit down and long for times past; we must meet our culture
with realism and love and fill it with the Gospel. We are sent today to proclaim the Good News of
Jesus to a new age. We need to love this time with all its opportunities and risks, its joys and
sorrows, its riches and its limits, its successes and failures”.
ing the Synod, one of the young auditors from the Samoan Islands spoke of the Church
as a canoe, in which the elderly help to keep on course by judging the position of the stars, while
the young keep rowing, imagining what waits for them ahead. Let us steer clear of young people
who think that adults represent a meaningless past, and those adults who always think they know
how young people should act. Instead, let us all climb aboard the same canoe and together seek a
better world, with the constantly renewed momentum of the Holy Spirit.
Youth Ministry
th ministry, as traditionally carried out, has been significantly affected by social and
cultural changes. Young people frequently fail to find in our usual programs a response to their
concerns, their needs, their problems and issues. The proliferation and growth of groups and
movements predominantly associated with the young can be considered the work of the Holy
Spirit who constantly shows us new paths. Even so, there is a need to look at the ways such
groups participate in the Church’s overall pastoral care, as well as a need for greater communion
among them and a better coordination of their activities. Although it is never easy to approach
young people, two things have become increasingly evident: the realization that the entire
community has to be involved in evangelizing them, and the urgent requirement that young people
take on a greater role in pastoral outreach.
A pastoral care that is synodal
ant to state clearly that young people themselves are agents of youth ministry. Certainly
they need to he helped and guided, but at the same time left free to develop new approaches, with
creativity and a certain audacity. So I will not attempt here to propose a kind of manual of youth
ministry or a practical pastoral guide. I am more concerned with helping young people to use their
insight, ingenuity and knowledge to address the issues and concerns of other young people in
their own language.
 young make us see the need for new styles and new strategies. For example, while
adults often worry about having everything properly planned, with regular meetings and fixed
times, most young people today have little interest in this kind of pastoral approach. Youth ministry
needs to become more flexible: inviting young people to events or occasions that provide an
opportunity not only for learning, but also for conversing, celebrating, singing, listening to real
stories and experiencing a shared encounter with the living God.
At the same time, we should take into greater consideration those practices that have shown
their value – the methods, language and aims that have proved truly effective in bringing young
people to Christ and the Church. It does not matter where they are coming from or what labels
they have received, whether “conservative” or “liberal”, “traditional” or “progressive”. What is
important is that we make use of everything that has borne good fruit and effectively
communicates the joy of the Gospel.
Youth ministry has to be synodal; it should involve a “journeying together” that values “the
charisms that the Spirit bestows in accordance with the vocation and role of each of the Church’s
members, through a process of co-responsibility... Motivated by this spirit, we can move towards a
participatory and co-responsible Church, one capable of appreciating its own rich variety,
gratefully accepting the contributions of the lay faithful, including young people and women,
consecrated persons, as well as groups, associations and movements. No one should be
excluded or exclude themselves”.
In this way, by learning from one another, we can better reflect that wonderful multifaceted
reality that Christ’s Church is meant to be. She will be able to attract young people, for her unity is
not monolithic, but rather a network of varied gifts that the Spirit ceaselessly pours out upon her,
renewing her and lifting her up from her poverty.
In the Synod, many concrete proposals emerged for renewing youth ministry and freeing it
from approaches that are no longer effective because they are incapable of entering into dialogue
with contemporary youth culture. Naturally, I cannot list them all here. A number of them can be
found in the Final Document of the Synod.
Main courses of action
ish simply to emphasize that youth ministry involves two main courses of action. One is
outreach, the way we attract new young people to an experience of the Lord. The other is growth,
the way we help those who have already had that experience to mature in it.
As for outreach, I trust that young people themselves know how best to find appealing ways
to come together. They know how to organize events, sports competitions and ways to evangelize
using social media, through text messages, songs, videos and other ways. They only have to be
encouraged and given the freedom to be enthused about evangelizing other young people
wherever they are to be found. When the message is first brought up, whether at a youth retreat,
in a conversation at a bar, on school holidays, or in any of God’s mysterious ways, it can awaken a
deep experience of faith. What is most important, though, is that each young person can be daring
enough to sow the seed of the message on that fertile terrain that is the heart of another young
person.
In this outreach, we need to use above all the language of closeness, the language of
generous, relational and existential love that touches the heart, impacts life, and awakens hope
and desires. Young people need to be approached with the grammar of love, not by being
preached at. The language that young people understand is spoken by those who radiate life, by
those who are there for them and with them. And those who, for all their limitations and
weaknesses, try to live their faith with integrity. We also have to give greater thought to ways of
incarnating the kerygma in the language of today’s youth.
As for growth, I would make one important point. In some places, it happens that young
people are helped to have a powerful experience of God, an encounter with Jesus that touched
their hearts. But the only follow-up to this is a series of “formation” meetings featuring talks about
doctrinal and moral issues, the evils of today’s world, the Church, her social doctrine, chastity,
marriage, birth control and so on. As a result, many young people get bored, they lose the fire of
their encounter with Christ and the joy of following him; many give up and others become
downcast or negative. Rather than being too concerned with communicating a great deal of
doctrine, let us first try to awaken and consolidate the great experiences that sustain the Christian
life. In the words of Romano Guardini, “when we experience a great love… everything else
becomes part of it”.
Any educational project or path of growth for young people must certainly include formation in
Christian doctrine and morality. It is likewise important that it have two main goals. One is the
development of the kerygma, the foundational experience of encounter with God through Christ’s
death and resurrection. The other is growth in fraternal love, community life and service.
This was something I emphasized in Evangelii Gaudium, and I consider it worth repeating
here. It would be a serious mistake to think that in youth ministry “the kerygma should give way to
a supposedly more ‘solid’ formation. Nothing is more solid, profound, secure, meaningful and
wisdom-filled than that initial proclamation. All Christian formation consists of entering more deeply
into the kerygma” and incarnating it ever more fully in our lives. Consequently, youth ministry
should always include occasions for renewing and deepening our personal experience of the love
of God and the living Christ. It can do this in a variety of ways: testimonies, songs, moments of
adoration, times of spiritual reflection on the sacred Scriptures, and even an intelligent use of
social networks. Yet this joyful experience of encounter with the Lord should never be replaced by
a kind of “indoctrination”.
On the other hand, any program of youth ministry should clearly incorporate various
means and resources that can help young people grow in fraternity, to live as brothers and sisters,
to help one another, to build community, to be of service to others, to be close to the poor. If
fraternal love is the “new commandment”, “the fullness of the Law”  and our
best way of showing our love for God, then it has to have a primary place in every project of youth
formation and growth to maturity.
Suitable environments
We need to make all our institutions better equipped to be more welcoming to young people,
since so many have a real sense of being orphaned. Here I am not referring to family problems but
to something experienced by boys and girls, young people and adults, parents and children alike.
To all these orphans – including perhaps ourselves – communities like a parish or school should
offer possibilities for experiencing openness and love, affirmation and growth. Many young people
today feel that they have inherited the failed dreams of their parents and grandparents, dreams
betrayed by injustice, social violence, selfishness and lack of concern for others. In a word, they
feel uprooted. If the young grow up in a world in ashes, it will be hard for them to keep alive the
flame of great dreams and projects. If they grow up in a desert devoid of meaning, where will they
develop a desire to devote their lives to sowing seeds? The experience of discontinuity,
uprootedness and the collapse of fundamental certainties, fostered by today’s media culture,
creates a deep sense of orphanhood to which we must respond by creating an attractive and
fraternal environment where others can live with a sense of purpose.
In a word, to create a “home” is to create “a family”. “It is to learn to feel connected to others
by more than merely utilitarian and practical bonds, to be united in such a way as to feel that our
life is a bit more human. To create a home is to let prophecy take flesh and make our hours and
days less cold, less indifferent and anonymous. It is to create bonds by simple, everyday acts that
all of us can perform. A home, as we all know, demands that everyone work together. No one can
be indifferent or stand apart, since each is a stone needed to build the home. This also involves
asking the Lord to grant us the grace to learn how to be patient, to forgive one another, to start
over each day. How many times should I forgive and start over? Seventy times seven times, as
many times as necessary. To create strong bonds requires confidence and trust nurtured daily by
patience and forgiveness. And that is how the miracle takes place: we feel that here we are
reborn, here we are all reborn, because we feel God’s caress that enables us to dream of a more
human world, and therefore of a world more divine”.
Along these lines, our institutions should provide young people with places they can make
their own, where they can come and go freely, feel welcome and readily meet other young people,
whether at times of difficulty and frustration, or of joy and celebration. Some of this is already
happening in oratories and other youth centres, which in many cases offer a friendly and relaxed
setting where friendships can grow, where young men and women can meet one another, where
they can share music, games, sports, but also reflection and prayer. In such places, much can be
offered, without great expenditure of funds. Then too, the person-to-person contact indispensable
for passing on the message can happen, something whose place cannot be taken by any pastoral
resource or strategy.
“Friendship and discussion, often within more or less structured groups, offer the opportunity
to strengthen social and relational skills in a context in which one is neither analysed nor judged.
Group experience is also a great resource for sharing the faith and for mutual help in bearing
witness. The young are able to guide other young people and to exercise a genuine apostolate
among their friends”.
This is not to say that they should become isolated and lose all contact with parish
communities, movements and other ecclesial institutions. But they will be better integrated into
communities that are open, living their faith, eager to radiate Christ, joyful, free, fraternal and
committed. These communities can be settings where they feel that it is possible to cultivate
precious relationships.
Youth ministry in educational institutions
Schools are unquestionably a platform for drawing close to children and young people.
Precisely because they are such privileged places of personal development, the Christian
community has always been concerned to train teachers and administrators, and to found its own
schools of various kinds and levels. In this field of educating the young, the Spirit has raised up
countless charisms and examples of holiness. Yet schools are in urgent need of self-criticism, if
we consider the results of their pastoral outreach, which in many cases focuses on a kind of
religious instruction that proves often incapable of nurturing lasting experiences of faith. Some
Catholic schools seem to be structured only for the sake of self-preservation. Fear of change
makes them entrenched and defensive before the dangers, real or imagined, that any change
might bring. A school that becomes a “bunker”, protecting its students from errors “from without” is
a caricature of this tendency. Yet this image reflects, in a chilling way, what many young people
experience when they graduate from certain educational institutions: an insurmountable
disconnect between what they were taught and the world in which they live. The way they were
instructed in religious and moral values did not prepare them to uphold those values in a world that
holds them up to ridicule, nor did they learn ways of praying and practicing the faith that can be
easily sustained amid the fast pace of today’s society. For one of the greatest joys that any
educator can have is to see a student turn into a strong, well-integrated person, a leader,
someone prepared to give.
Catholic schools remain essential places for the evangelization of the young. Account should
be taken of a number of guiding principles set forth in Veritatis Gaudium for the renewal and
revival of missionary outreach on the part of schools and universities. These include a fresh
experience of the kerygma, wide-ranging dialogue, interdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary
approaches, the promotion of a culture of encounter, the urgency of creating networks and an
option in favor of those who are least, those whom society discards. Similarly important is
the ability to integrate the knowledge of head, heart and hands.
On the other hand, we cannot separate spiritual from cultural formation. The Church has
always sought to develop ways of providing the young with the best education possible. Nor
should she stop now, for young people have a right to it. “Today, above all, the right to a good
education means protecting wisdom, that is, knowledge that is human and humanizing. All too
often we are conditioned by trivial and fleeting models of life that drive us to pursue success at a
low price, discrediting sacrifice and inculcating the idea that education is not necessary unless it
immediately provides concrete results. No, education makes us raise questions, keeps us from
being anaesthetized by banality, and impels us to pursue meaning in life. We need to reclaim our
right not to be sidetracked by the many sirens that nowadays distract from this pursuit. Ulysses, in
order not to give in to the siren song that bewitched his sailors and made them crash against the
rocks, tied himself to the mast of the ship and had his companions plug their ears. Orpheus, on the
other hand, did something else to counter the siren song: he intoned an even more beautiful
melody, which enchanted the sirens. This, then, is your great challenge: to respond to the crippling
refrains of cultural consumerism with thoughtful and firm decisions, with research, knowledge and
sharing”.
Areas needing to be developed
Many young people have come to appreciate silence and closeness to God. Groups that
gather to adore the Blessed Sacrament or to pray with the word of God have also increased. We
should never underestimate the ability of young people to be open to contemplative prayer. We
need only find the right ways and means to help them embark on this precious experience. When
it comes to worship and prayer, “in many settings, young Catholics are asking for prayer
opportunities and sacramental celebrations capable of speaking to their daily lives through a fresh,
authentic and joyful liturgy”. It is important to make the most of the great moments of the
liturgical year, particularly Holy Week, Pentecost and Christmas. But other festive occasions can
provide a welcome break in their routine and help them experience the joy of faith.
Christian service represents a unique opportunity for growth and openness to God’s gifts of
faith and charity. Many young people are attracted by the possibility of helping others, especially
children and the poor. Often this service is the first step to a discovery or rediscovery of life in
Christ and the Church. Many young people grow weary of our programs of doctrinal and
spiritual formation, and at times demand a chance to be active participants in activities that benefit
others.
Nor can we overlook the importance of the arts, like theatre, painting, and others. “Music is
particularly important, representing as it does a real environment in which the young are constantly
immersed, as well as a culture and a language capable of arousing emotion and shaping identity.
The language of music also represents a pastoral resource with a particular bearing on the liturgy
and its renewal”. Singing can be a great incentive to young people as they make their way
through life. As Saint Augustine says: “Sing, but continue on your journey. Do not grow lazy, but
sing to make the way more enjoyable. Sing, but keep going… If you make progress, you will
continue your journey, but be sure that your progress is in virtue, true faith and right living. Sing
then, and keep walking”. [Equally significant is the emphasis that young people place on sports; the Church should not
underestimate the potential of sports for education and formation, but instead maintain a strong
presence there. The world of sport needs to be helped to overcome some of its problematic
aspects, such as the idolization of champions, subservience to commercial interests and the
ideology of success at any cost”. At the heart of the experience of sport is “joy: the joy of
exercising, of being together, of being alive and rejoicing in the gifts the Creator gives us each
day”. Some Fathers of the Church used the example of the training of athletes to encourage
the young to develop their strength and to overcome idleness and boredom. Saint Basil the Great,
writing to young people, used the effort demanded by athletics to illustrate the value of self sacrifice as a means of growth in virtue: “These men endure sufferings beyond number, they use many means to build their strength, they sweat constantly as they train... in a word, they so
discipline themselves that their whole life prior to the contest is but a preparation for it... How then
can we, who have been promised rewards so wondrous in number and in splendor that no
tongue can recount them, even think of winning them if we do nothing other than spend our lives in
leisure and make but half-hearted efforts?”
Nature holds a special attraction for many adolescents and young people who recognize our
need to care for the environment. Such is the case with the scouting movement and other groups
that encourage closeness to nature, camping trips, hiking, expeditions and campaigns to improve
the environment. In the spirit of Saint Francis of Assisi, these experiences can be a real initiation
into the school of universal fraternity and contemplative prayer.
These and various other opportunities for evangelizing the young should not make us forget
that, despite the changing times and sensibilities of young people, there are gifts of God that never
grow old, for they contain a power transcending all times and places. There is the word of the
Lord, ever living and effective, the nourishing presence of Christ in the Eucharist, and the
sacrament of Reconciliation, which brings us freedom and strength. We can also mention the
inexhaustible spiritual riches preserved by the Church in the witness of her saints and the teaching
of the great spiritual masters. Although we have to respect different stages of growth, and at times
need to wait patiently for the right moment, we cannot fail to invite young people to drink from
these wellsprings of new life. We have no right to deprive them of this great good.
A “popular” youth ministry
In addition to the ordinary, well-planned pastoral ministry that parishes and movements carry
out, it is also important to allow room for a “popular” youth ministry, with a different style, schedule,
pace and method. Broader and more flexible, it goes out to those places where real young people
are active, and fosters the natural leadership qualities and the charisms sown by the Holy Spirit. It
tries to avoid imposing obstacles, rules, controls and obligatory structures on these young
believers who are natural leaders in their neighbourhoods and in other settings. We need only to
accompany and encourage them, trusting a little more in the genius of the Holy Spirit, who acts as
he wills.
We are speaking of truly “popular” leaders, not elitists or those closed off in small groups of
select individuals. To be able to generate a “popular” ministry to youth, “they need to learn to listen
to the sense of the people, to become their spokespersons and to work for their promotion”.
When we speak of “the people”, we are not speaking about the structures of society or the Church,
but about all those persons who journey, not as individuals, but as a closely-bound community of
all and for all, one that refuses to leave the poor and the vulnerable behind. “The people wants
everyone to share in the common good and thus agree to keep pace with its least members, so
that all can arrive together”. “Popular” leaders, then, are those able to make everyone,
including the poor, the vulnerable, the frail and the wounded, part of the forward march of youth.
They do not shun or fear those young people who have experienced hurt or borne the weight of
the cross.
Similarly, especially in the case of young people who do not come from Christian families or
institutions, and are slowly growing to maturity, we have to encourage all the good that we
can. Christ warned us not to see only the good grain. At times, in the
attempt to develop a pure and perfect youth ministry, marked by abstract ideas, protected from the
world and free of every flaw, we can turn the Gospel into a dull, meaningless and unattractive
proposition. Such a youth ministry ends up completely removed from the world of young people
and suited only to an elite Christian youth that sees itself as different, while living in an empty and
unproductive isolation. In rejecting the weeds, we also uproot or choke any number of shoots
trying to spring up in spite of their limitations.
Instead of “overwhelming young people with a body of rules that make Christianity seem
reductive and moralistic, we are called to invest in their fearlessness and to train them to take up
their responsibilities, in the sure knowledge that error, failure and crisis are experiences that can
strengthen their humanity”.
The Synod called for the development of a youth ministry capable of being inclusive, with
room for all kinds of young people, to show that we are a Church with open doors. Nor does one
have to accept fully all the teachings of the Church to take part in certain of our activities for young
people. It is enough to have an open mind towards all those who have the desire and willingness
to be encountered by God’s revealed truth. Some of our pastoral activities can assume that a
journey of faith has already begun, but we need a “popular” youth ministry that can open doors
and make room for everyone, with their doubts and frustrations, their problems and their efforts to
find themselves, their past errors, their experiences of sin and all their difficulties.
Room should also be made for “all those who have other visions of life, who belong to other
religions or who distance themselves from religion altogether. All the young, without exception, are
in God’s heart and thus in the Church’s heart. We recognize frankly that this statement on our lips
does not always find real expression in our pastoral actions: often we remain closed in our
environments, where their voice does not penetrate, or else we dedicate ourselves to less
demanding and more enjoyable activities, suppressing that healthy pastoral restlessness that
would urge us to move out from our supposed security. The Gospel also asks us to be daring, and
we want to be so, without presumption and without proselytizing, testifying to the love of the Lord
and stretching out our hands to all the young people in the world”.
Youth ministry, when it ceases to be elitist and is willing to be “popular”, is a process that is
gradual, respectful, patient, hopeful, tireless and compassionate. The Synod proposed the
example of the disciples of Emmaus  as a model of what happens in youth
ministry.
“Jesus walks with two disciples who did not grasp the meaning of all that happened to him,
and are leaving Jerusalem and the community behind. Wanting to accompany them, he joins them
on the way. He asks them questions and listens patiently to their version of events, and in this way
he helps them recognize what they were experiencing. Then, with affection and power, he
proclaims the word to them, leading them to interpret the events they had experienced in the light
of the Scriptures. He accepts their invitation to stay with them as evening falls; he enters into their
night. As they listen to him speak, their hearts burn within them and their minds are opened; they
then recognize him in the breaking of the bread. They themselves choose to resume their journey
at once in the opposite direction, to return to the community and to share the experience of their
encounter with the risen Lord”.
Various manifestations of popular piety, especially pilgrimages, attract young people who do
not readily feel at home in ecclesial structures, and represent a concrete sign of their trust in God.
These ways of seeking God are seen particularly in young people who are poor, but also those in
other sectors of society. They should not be looked down on, but encouraged and promoted.
Popular piety “is a legitimate way of living the faith” and “an expression of the spontaneous
missionary activity of the People of God”.
Always missionaries
Here I would point out that it doesn’t take much to make young people missionaries. Even
those who are most frail, limited and troubled can be missionaries in their own way, for goodness
can always be shared, even if it exists alongside many limitations. A young person who makes a
pilgrimage to ask Our Lady for help, and invites a friend or companion along, by that single
gesture is being a good missionary. Inseparable from a “popular” youth ministry is an irrepressible
“popular” missionary activity that breaks through our customary models and ways of thinking. Let
us accompany and encourage it, but not presume to overly regulate it.
If we can hear what the Spirit is saying to us, we have to realize that youth ministry is always
missionary. Young people are greatly enriched when they overcome their reticence and dare to
visit homes, and in this way make contact with people’s lives. They learn how to look beyond their
family and their group of friends, and they gain a broader vision of life. At the same time, their faith
and their sense of being part of the Church grow stronger. Youth missions, which usually take
place during school holidays after a period of preparation, can lead to a renewed experience of
faith and even serious thoughts about a vocation.
Young people can find new fields for mission in the most varied settings. For example, since
they are already so familiar with social networks, they should be encouraged to fill them with God,
fraternity and commitment.
Accompaniment by adults
Young people need to have their freedom respected, yet they also need to be accompanied.
The family should be the first place of accompaniment. Youth ministry can present the ideal of life
in Christ as the process of building a house on rock. For most young people, that
house, their life, will be built on marriage and married love. That is why youth ministry and the
pastoral care of families should be coordinated and integrated, with the aim of ensuring a
continuous and suitable accompaniment of the vocational process.
The community has an important role in the accompaniment of young people; it should feel
collectively responsible for accepting, motivating, encouraging and challenging them. All should
regard young people with understanding, appreciation and affection, and avoid constantly judging
them or demanding of them a perfection beyond their years.
At the Synod, “many pointed to the shortage of qualified people devoted to accompaniment.
Belief in the theological and pastoral value of listening entails rethinking and renewing the ways
that priestly ministry is ordinarily exercised, and reviewing its priorities. The Synod also recognized
the need to train consecrated persons and laypeople, male and female, to accompany young
people. The charism of listening that the Holy Spirit calls forth within the communities might also
receive institutional recognition as a form of ecclesial service”.
There is also a special need to accompany young men and women showing leadership
potential, so that they can receive training and the necessary qualifications. The young people
who met before the Synod called for “programs for the formation and continued development of
young leaders. Some young women feel that there is a lack of leading female role models within
the Church and they too wish to give their intellectual and professional gifts to the Church. We also
believe that seminarians and religious should have an even greater ability to accompany young
leaders”.
The same young people described to us the qualities they hope to find in a mentor, and they
expressed this with much clarity. “The qualities of such a mentor include: being a faithful Christian
who engages with the Church and the world; someone who constantly seeks holiness; someone
who is a confidant without judging. Similarly, someone who actively listens to the needs of young
people and responds in kind; someone deeply loving and self-aware; someone who recognizes his
or her limits and knows the joys and sorrows of the spiritual journey. An especially important
quality in mentors is the acknowledgement of their own humanity – the fact that they are human
beings who make mistakes: not perfect people but forgiven sinners. Sometimes mentors are put
on a pedestal, and when they fall, it may have a devastating impact on young people’s ability to
continue to engage with the Church. Mentors should not lead young people as passive followers,
but walk alongside them, allowing them to be active participants in the journey. They should
respect the freedom that comes with a young person’s process of discernment and equip them
with tools to do so well. A mentor should believe wholeheartedly in a young person’s ability to
participate in the life of the Church. A mentor should therefore nurture the seeds of faith in young
people, without expecting to immediately see the fruits of the work of the Holy Spirit. This role is
not and cannot be limited to priests and consecrated life, but the laity should also be empowered
to take on such a role. All such mentors should benefit from being well-formed, and engage in
ongoing formation”.
The Church’s educational institutions are undoubtedly a communal setting for
accompaniment; they can offer guidance to many young people, especially when they “seek to
welcome all young people, regardless of their religious choices, cultural origins and personal,
family or social situations. In this way, the Church makes a fundamental contribution to the integral
education of the young in various parts of the world”. They would curtail this role unduly were
they to lay down rigid criteria for students to enter and remain in them, since they would deprive
many young people of an accompaniment that could help enrich their lives.
Vocation
The word “vocation” can be understood in a broad sense as a calling from God, including the
call to life, the call to friendship with him, the call to holiness, and so forth. This is helpful, since it
situates our whole life in relation to the God who loves us. It makes us realize that nothing is the
result of pure chance but that everything in our lives can become a way of responding to the Lord,
who has a wonderful plan for us.
In the Exhortation Gaudete et Exsultate, I spoke about the vocation of all to grow and mature
for the glory of God; I wanted “to repropose the call to holiness in a practical way for our own time,
with all its risks, challenges and opportunities”. The Second Vatican Council helped us to
recognize anew this call addressed to each of us: “All the faithful, whatever their condition or state,
are called by the Lord, each in his or her own way, to that perfect holiness by which the Father
himself is perfect”.
God’s call to friendship
The first thing we need to discern and discover is this: Jesus wants to be a friend to every
young person. This discernment is the basis of all else. In the risen Lord’s dialogue with Simon
Peter, his great question was: “Simon, son of John, do you love me?”. In other words,
do you love me as a friend? The mission that Peter received to shepherd Jesus’ flock will always
be linked to this gratuitous love, this love of friendship.
On the other hand, there was the unsuccessful encounter of Jesus and the rich young man,
which clearly shows that the young man failed to perceive the Lord’s loving gaze.
He went away sorrowful, despite his original good intentions, because he could not turn his back
on his many possessions. He missed the opportunity of what surely would have
been a great friendship. We will never know what that one young man, upon whom Jesus gazed
with love and to whom he stretched out his hand, might have been for us, what he might have
done for mankind.
“The life that Jesus gives us is a love story, a life history that wants to blend with ours and
sink roots in the soil of our own lives. That life is not salvation up ‘in the cloud’ and waiting to be
downloaded, a new ‘app’ to be discovered, or a technique of mental self-improvement. Still less is
that life a ‘tutorial’ for finding out the latest news. The salvation that God offers us is an invitation to
be part of a love story interwoven with our personal stories; it is alive and wants to be born in our
midst so that we can bear fruit just as we are, wherever we are and with everyone all around us.
The Lord comes there to sow and to be sown”.
Being there for others
I would now like to speak of vocation in the strict sense, as a call to missionary service to
others. The Lord calls us to share in his work of creation and to contribute to the common good by
using the gifts we have received.
This missionary vocation thus has to do with service. For our life on earth reaches full stature
when it becomes an offering. Here I would repeat that “the mission of being in the heart of the
people is not just a part of my life or a badge I can take off; it is not an ‘extra’ or just another
moment in life. Instead, it is something I cannot uproot from my being without destroying my very
self. I am a mission on this earth; that is the reason why I am here in this world”. It follows
that every form of pastoral activity, formation and spirituality should be seen in the light of our
Christian vocation.
Your own personal vocation does not consist only in the work you do, though that is an
expression of it. Your vocation is something more: it is a path guiding your many efforts and
actions towards service to others. So in discerning your vocation, it is important to determine if you
see in yourself the abilities needed to perform that specific service to society.
This gives greater value to everything you do. Your work stops being just about making
money, keeping busy or pleasing others. It becomes your vocation because you are called to it; it
is something more than merely a pragmatic decision. In the end, it is a recognition of why I was
made, why I am here on earth, and what the Lord’s plan is for my life. He will not show me every
place, time and detail, since I will have to make my own prudent decisions about these. But he will
show me a direction in life, for he is my Creator and I need to listen to his voice, so that, like clay in
the hands of a potter, I can let myself be shaped and guided by him. Then I will become what I
was meant to be, faithful to my own reality.
To respond to our vocation, we need to foster and develop all that we are. This has nothing to
do with inventing ourselves or creating ourselves out of nothing. It has to do with finding our true
selves in the light of God and letting our lives flourish and bear fruit. “In God’s plan, every man and
woman is meant to seek self-fulfillment, for every human life is called to some task by God”.
Your vocation inspires you to bring out the best in yourself for the glory of God and the good of
others. It is not simply a matter of doing things, but of doing them with meaning and direction.
Saint Alberto Hurtado told young people to think very seriously about the direction their lives
should take: “If the helmsman of a ship becomes careless, he is fired straightaway for not taking
his sacred responsibility seriously. As for our lives, are we fully aware of the course they are
taking? What course is your life taking? If it is necessary to give this more thought, I would beg
each one of you to give it the highest consideration, because to get it right is tantamount to
success; to err is quite simply to fail”.
In the life of each young person, this “being there for others” normally has to do with two
basic issues: forming a new family and working. Surveys of young people repeatedly confirm that
these are the two major issues worrying them and, at the same time, exciting them. Both must be
the object of particular discernment. Let us look briefly at each of them.
Love and family
Young people intensely feel the call to love; they dream of meeting the right person with
whom they can form a family and build a life together. This is undoubtedly a vocation which God
himself makes known to them through their feelings, desires and dreams. I dwelt more fully on this
theme in the Apostolic Exhortation Amoris Laetitia. I would encourage all young people to read
especially the fourth and fifth chapters of that Exhortation.
I like to think that “two Christians who marry have recognized the call of the Lord in their own
love story, the vocation to form one flesh and one life from two, male and female. The Sacrament
of Holy Matrimony envelops this love in the grace of God; it roots it in God himself. By this gift, and
by the certainty of this call, you can go forward with assurance; you have nothing to fear; you can
face everything together!”
Here, we need to remember that God created us as sexual beings. He himself “created
sexuality, which is a marvelous gift to his creatures”. Within the vocation to marriage we
should acknowledge and appreciate that “sexuality, sex, is a gift from God. It is not taboo. It is a
gift from God, a gift the Lord gives us. It has two purposes: to love and to generate life. It is
passion, passionate love. True love is passionate. Love between a man and a woman, when it is
passionate, always leads to giving life. Always. To give life with body and soul”.
The Synod insisted that “the family continues to be the principal point of reference for young
people. Children appreciate the love and care of their parents, they give importance to family
bonds, and they hope to succeed in forming a family when it is their time. Without doubt, the
increase of separation, divorce, second unions and single-parent families can cause great
suffering and a crisis of identity in young people. Sometimes they must take on responsibilities that
are not proportioned to their age and that force them to become adults before their time. Often,
grandparents are a crucial aid in affection and religious education: with their wisdom they are a
vital link in the relationship between generations”.
It is true that the difficulties they experience in their own family can lead many young people
to ask whether it is worthwhile to start a new family, to be faithful, to be generous. I can tell you
that it certainly is. It is worth your every effort to invest in the family; there you will find the best
incentives to mature and the greatest joys to experience and share. Don’t let yourselves be robbed
of a great love. Don’t let yourselves be led astray by those who propose a life of rampant
individualism that in the end leads to isolation and the worst sort of loneliness.
Today, a culture of the ephemeral dominates, but it is an illusion. To think that nothing can be
definitive is a deceptive lie. “Today, there are those who say that marriage is out of fashion… In a
culture of relativism and the ephemeral, many preach the importance of ‘enjoying’ the present
moment. They say that it is not worth making a lifelong commitment, making a definitive
decision… I ask you, instead, to be revolutionaries, I ask you to swim against the tide; yes, I am
asking you to rebel against this culture that sees everything as temporary and that ultimately
believes you are incapable of responsibility, incapable of true love”. I have great confidence
in you, and for this very reason, I urge you to opt for marriage.
Marriage requires preparation, and this calls for growing in self-knowledge, developing the
greater virtues, particularly love, patience, openness to dialogue and helping others. It also
involves maturing in your own sexuality, so that it can become less and less a means of using
others, and increasingly a capacity to entrust yourself fully to another person in an exclusive and
generous way.
As the bishops of Colombia have taught, “Christ knows that spouses are not perfect and that
they need to overcome their weakness and lack of constancy so that their love can grow and
endure. For this reason, he grants spouses his grace, which is at once light and the strength
enabling them to achieve progressively their ideal of married life in accordance with God’s
plan”.
For those who are not called to marriage or the consecrated life, it must always be
remembered that the first and most important vocation is the vocation we have received in
baptism. Those who are single, even if not by their own choice, can offer a particular witness to
that vocation through their own path of personal growth.
Work
The bishops of the United States have pointed out that “young adulthood often signals a
person’s entrance into the world of work. ‘What do you do for a living?’ is a constant topic of
conversation because work is a major part of their lives. For young adults, this experience is highly
fluid because they move from job to job and even from career to career. Work can dictate their use
of time and can determine what they can afford to do or buy. It can also determine the quality and
quantity of leisure time. Work defines and influences a young adult’s identity and self-concept and
is a prime place where friendships and other relationships develop because generally it is not
done alone. Young men and women speak of work as fulfilling a function and providing meaning.
Work allows young adults to meet their practical needs but even more importantly to seek
meaning and fulfillment of their dreams and visions. Although work may not help achieve their
dreams, it is important for young adults to nurture a vision, learn how to work in a truly personal
and life-giving way, and to continue to discern God’s call”.
I ask young people not to expect to live without working, depending on others for help. This is
not good, because “work is a necessity, part of the meaning of life on this earth, a path to growth,
human development and personal fulfillment. In this sense, helping the poor financially must
always be a provisional solution in the face of pressing needs”. Hence, “together with the
awe-filled contemplation of creation which we find in Saint Francis of Assisi, the Christian spiritual
tradition has also developed a rich and balanced understanding of the meaning of work, as, for
example, in the life of Blessed Charles de Foucauld and his followers”.
The Synod noted that in the area of work, young people can “experience forms of exclusion
and marginalization, of which the first and most serious is youth unemployment, which in some
countries reaches exorbitant levels. Besides making them poor, the lack of work impacts
negatively on young people’s capacity to dream and to hope, and it deprives them of the possibility
of contributing to the development of society. In many countries, this situation depends on the fact
that some sectors of the young population lack adequate professional skills, perhaps because of
deficiencies in the system of education and training. Often job insecurity among the young is
linked to economic interests that exploit labor”.
This is a highly complex and sensitive issue that politics must make a priority, especially at
present, when the speed of technological advances and the concern to reduce labor costs can
lead quickly to the replacement of many jobs by machines. It is also a crucial societal issue
because employment for a young person is not merely a means of making money. Work is an
expression of human dignity, a path of development and of social inclusion. It is a constant
stimulus to grow in responsibility and creativity, a protection against the tendency towards
individualism and personal gratification. At the same time, it is an opportunity to give glory to God
by developing one’s abilities.
Young people do not always have the chance to decide what kind of work they will do, or how
their energies and talents will be spent. Because, alongside their own aspirations, abilities and
choices, there is the harsh reality of the job market. It is true that you cannot live without working,
and that sometimes you have to accept whatever is available, but I ask you never to give up on
your dreams, never completely bury a calling, and never accept defeat. Keep seeking at least
partial or imperfect ways to live what you have discerned to be your real calling.
When we discover that God is calling us to something, that this or that is what we were made
for – whether it be nursing, carpentry, communication, engineering, teaching, art or any other kind
of work – then we will be able to summon up our best capacities for sacrifice, generosity and
dedication. Knowing that we don’t do things just for the sake of doing them, but rather we endow
them with meaning, as a response to a call that resounds in the depth of our being to offer
something to others: that is what makes these occupations bring a sense of deep fulfillment. As we
read in the ancient biblical book of Ecclesiastes: “I saw that there is nothing better than that a man
should enjoy his work” .
The vocation to special consecration
If we are indeed convinced that the Holy Spirit continues to inspire vocations to the
priesthood and the religious life, we can “once more cast out the nets” in the Lord’s name, with
complete confidence. We can dare, as we should, to tell each young person to ask whether this is
the path that they are meant to follow.
Occasionally, I would bring this up with young people, and they would respond almost
jokingly: “No, that’s not for me!” Yet, a few years later, some of them were in the seminary. The
Lord cannot fail in his promise to provide the Church with shepherds, for without them she would
not be able to live and carry out her mission. If it is true that some priests do not give good
witness, that does not mean that the Lord stops calling. On the contrary, he doubles the stakes, for
he never ceases to care for his beloved Church.
In discerning your vocation, do not dismiss the possibility of devoting yourself to God in the
priesthood, the religious life or in other forms of consecration. Why not? You can be sure that, if
you do recognize and follow a call from God, there you will find complete fulfillment.
Jesus is walking in our midst, as he did in Galilee. He walks through our streets, and he
quietly stops and looks into our eyes. His call is attractive and intriguing. Yet today the stress and
quick pace of a world constantly bombarding us with stimuli can leave no room for that interior
silence in which we can perceive Jesus’ gaze and hear his call. In the meantime, many attractively
packaged offers will come your way. They may seem appealing and exciting, although in time they
will only leave you feeling empty, weary and alone. Don’t let this happen to you, because the
maelstrom of this world can drive you to take a route without real meaning, without direction,
without clear goals, and thus thwart many of your efforts. It is better to seek out that calm and
quiet that enable you to reflect, pray, look more clearly at the world around you, and then, with
Jesus, come to recognize the vocation that is yours in this world.
Discernment
In the Apostolic Exhortation Gaudete et Exsultate, I spoke in rather general terms about
discernment. I would now like to take up some of those reflections and apply them to the way we
discern our own vocation in the world.
I mentioned there that all of us, but “especially the young, are immersed in a culture of
zapping. We can navigate simultaneously on two or more screens and interact at the same time
with two or three virtual scenarios. Without the wisdom of discernment, we can easily become prey
to every passing trend”. Indeed, “this is all the more important when some novelty presents
itself in our lives. Then we have to decide whether it is new wine brought by God or an illusion
created by the spirit of this world or the spirit of the devil”.
Such discernment, “even though it includes reason and prudence, goes beyond them, for it
seeks a glimpse of that unique and mysterious plan that God has for each of us… It has to do with
the meaning of my life before the Father who knows and loves me, and with the real purpose of
my life, which nobody knows better than he”.
Here we see the importance of the formation of conscience, which allows discernment to
grow in depth and in fidelity to God: “Forming our conscience is the work of a lifetime, in which we
learn to cultivate the very sentiments of Jesus Christ, adopting the criteria behind his choices and
the intentions behind his actions ”.
In this process of formation, we let ourselves be transformed by Christ, even as we develop
“the habit of doing good, which also is a part of our examination of conscience. We do not simply
identify sins, but also recognize God’s work in our daily lives, in the events of our personal history
and the world around us, and in the witness of all those men and women who have gone before us
or accompany us with their wisdom. This helps us to grow in the virtue of prudence and to give an
overall direction to our life through concrete choices, in the serene awareness of both our gifts and
our limitations”.
Discerning your vocation
A particular form of discernment involves the effort to discover our own vocation. Since this is
a very personal decision that others cannot make for us, it requires a certain degree of solitude
and silence. “The Lord speaks to us in a variety of ways, at work, through others and at every
moment. Yet we simply cannot do without the silence of prolonged prayer, which enables us better
to perceive God’s language, to interpret the real meaning of the inspirations we believe we have
received, to calm our anxieties and to see the whole of our existence afresh in his own light”.
Yet this silence does not make us close in on ourselves. “We must remember that prayerful
discernment has to be born of an openness to listening – to the Lord and to others, and to reality
itself, which always challenges us in new ways. Only if we are prepared to listen, do we have the
freedom to set aside our own partial or insufficient ideas… In this way, we become truly open to
accepting a call that can shatter our security, but lead us to a better life. It is not enough that
everything be calm and peaceful. God may be offering us something more, but in our comfortable
inadvertence, we do not recognize it”.
When seeking to discern our own vocation, there are certain questions we ought to ask. We
should not start with wondering where we could make more money, or achieve greater recognition
and social status. Nor even by asking what kind of work would be most pleasing to us. If we are
not to go astray, we need a different starting point. We need to ask: Do I know myself, quite apart
from my illusions and emotions? Do I know what brings joy or sorrow to my heart? What are my
strengths and weaknesses? These questions immediately give rise to others: How can I serve
people better and prove most helpful to our world and to the Church? What is my real place in this
world? What can I offer to society? Even more realistic questions then follow: Do I have the
abilities needed to offer this kind of service? Could I develop those abilities?
These questions should be centred less on ourselves and our own inclinations, but on others,
so that our discernment leads us to see our life in relation to their lives. That is why I would remind
you of the most important question of all. “So often in life, we waste time asking ourselves: ‘Who
am I?’ You can keep asking, ‘Who am I?’ for the rest of your lives. But the real question is: ‘For
whom am I?’”. Of course, you are for God. But he has decided that you should also be for
others, and he has given you many qualities, inclinations, gifts and charisms that are not for you,
but to share with those around you.
The call of Jesus our friend
To discern our personal vocation, we have to realize that it is a calling from a friend, who is
Jesus. When we give something to our friends, we give them the best we have. It will not
necessarily be what is most expensive or hard to obtain, but what we know will make them happy.
Friends are so sensitive to this that they can already imagine the smile on their friend’s face when
he or she opens that gift. This sort of discernment that takes place among friends is what I suggest
you take as a model for trying to discover God’s will for your lives.
I want you to know that, when the Lord thinks of each of you and what he wants to give you,
he sees you as his close friend. And if he plans to grant you a grace, a charism that will help you
live to the full and become someone who benefits others, someone who leaves a mark in life, it will
surely be a gift that will bring you more joy and excitement than anything else in this world. Not
because that gift will be rare or extraordinary, but because it will perfectly fit you. It will be a perfect
fit for your entire life.
A vocation, while a gift, will undoubtedly also be demanding. God’s gifts are interactive; to
enjoy them we have to be ready to take risks. Yet the demands they make are not an obligation
imposed from without, but an incentive to let that gift grow and develop, and then become a gift for
others. When the Lord awakens a vocation, he thinks not only of what you already are, but of what
you will one day be, in his company and in that of others.
Sheer vitality and strength of personality combine in the hearts of young people to make them
constantly aim higher. This exuberance will be tempered by time and painful experiences, but it is
important for “this youthful and still untested yearning for the infinite” to encounter the
unconditional friendship that Jesus offers us. More than rules and obligations, the choice that
Jesus sets before us is to follow him as friends follow one another, seeking each other’s company
and spending time together out of pure friendship. Everything else will come in time, and even
failures in life can be an invaluable way of experiencing that friendship, which will never be lost.
Listening and accompaniment
There are many priests, men and women religious, lay and professional persons, and indeed
qualified young people, who can help the young with their vocational discernment. When we are
called upon to help others discern their path in life, what is uppermost is the ability to listen.
Listening calls for three distinct and complementary kinds of sensitivity.
The first kind of sensitivity is directed to the individual. It is a matter of listening to someone
who is sharing his very self in what he says. A sign of this willingness to listen is the time we are
ready to spare for others. More than the amount of time we spend, it is about making others feel
that my time is their time, that they have all the time they need to say everything they want. The
other person must sense that I am listening unconditionally, without being offended or shocked,
tired or bored. We see an example of this kind of listening in the Lord; he walks alongside the
disciples on the way to Emmaus, even though they are going in the wrong direction
When Jesus says he plans to go farther, they realize that he has given them the gift of his
time, so they decide to give him theirs by offering their hospitality. Attentive and selfless listening is
a sign of our respect for others, whatever their ideas or their choices in life.
The second kind of sensitivity is marked by discernment. It tries to grasp exactly where grace
or temptation is present, for sometimes the things that flit across our minds are mere temptations
that can distract us from our true path. I need to ask myself what is it that the other person is trying
to tell me, what they want me to realize is happening in their lives. Asking such questions helps
me appreciate their thinking and the effects it has on their emotions. This kind of listening seeks to
discern the salutary promptings of the good Spirit who proposes to us the Lord’s truth, but also the
traps laid by the evil spirit – his empty works and promises. It takes courage, warmth and tact to
help others distinguish the truth from illusions or excuses.
The third kind of sensitivity is the ability to perceive what is driving the other person. This calls
for a deeper kind of listening, one able to discern the direction in which that person truly wants to
move. Apart from what they are feeling or thinking right now, and whatever has happened up to
this point in their lives, the real issue is what they would like to be. This may demand that they look
not to their own superficial wishes and desires, but rather to what is most pleasing to the Lord, to
his plans for their life. And that is seen in a deeper inclination of the heart, beyond the surface
level of their likes and feelings. This kind of listening seeks to discern their ultimate intention, the
intention that definitively decides the meaning of their life. Jesus knows and appreciates this
ultimate intention of the heart. He is always there, ready to help each of us to recognize it. We
need but say to him: “Lord, save me! Have mercy on me!”
In this way, discernment becomes a genuine means of spiritual combat, helping us to follow
the Lord more faithfully. The desire to know our personal vocation thus takes on a supreme
intensity, a different quality and higher level, one that better respects the dignity of our person and
our life. In the end, good discernment is a path of freedom that brings to full fruit what is unique in
each person, something so personal that only God knows it. Others cannot fully understand or
predict from the outside how it will develop.
When we listen to others in this way, at a certain moment we ourselves have to disappear in
order to let the other person follow the path he or she has discovered. We have to vanish as the
Lord did from the sight of his disciples in Emmaus, leaving them alone with burning hearts and an
irresistible desire to set out immediately. When they returned to the community,
those disciples heard the good news that the Lord was indeed risen.
Because “time is greater than space”, we need to encourage and accompany
processes, without imposing our own roadmaps. For those processes have to do with persons
who remain always unique and free. There are no easy recipes, even when all the signs seem
positive, since “positive factors themselves need to be subjected to a careful work of discernment,
so that they do not become isolated and contradict one another, becoming absolutes and at odds
with one another. The same is true for the negative factors, which are not to be rejected en bloc
and without distinction, because in each one there may lie hidden some value which awaits
liberation and restoration to its full truth”.
If you are to accompany others on this path, you must be the first to follow it, day in and day
out. That is what Mary did, in her own youth, as she confronted her own questions and difficulties.
May she renew your youthfulness by the power of her prayers and accompany you always by her
maternal presence.
And to conclude… a wish
Dear young people, my joyful hope is to see you keep running the race before you,
outstripping all those who are slow or fearful. Keep running, “attracted by the face of Christ, whom
we love so much, whom we adore in the Holy Eucharist and acknowledge in the flesh of our
suffering brothers and sisters. May the Holy Spirit urge you on as you run this race. The Church
needs your momentum, your intuitions, your faith. We need them! And when you arrive where we
have not yet reached, have the patience to wait for us”.
