THE LAY MEMBERS of Christ's Faithful People (Christifideles Laici), whose "Vocation and
Mission in the Church and in the World Twenty Years after the Second Vatican Council" was the
topic of the 1987 Synod of Bishops, are those who form that part of the People of God which might
be likened to the laborers in the vineyard mentioned in Matthew's Gospel: "For the Kingdom of
heaven is like a householder who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.
After agreeing with the laborers for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard".
The gospel parable sets before our eyes the Lord's vast vineyard and the multitude of persons,
both women and men, who are called and sent forth by him to labor in it. The vineyard is the
whole world, which is to be transformed according to the plan of God in view of the
final coming of the Kingdom of God.
You Go Into My Vineyard Too
"And going out about the third hour he saw others standing idle in the marketplace; and to them
he said, 'You go into the vineyard too'".
From that distant day the call of the Lord Jesus "You go into my vineyard too" never fails to
resound in the course of history: it is addressed to every person who comes into this world.
In our times, the Church after Vatican II in a renewed outpouring of the Spirit of Pentecost has
come to a more lively awareness of her missionary nature and has listened again to the voice of
her Lord who sends her forth into the world as "the universal sacrament of salvation".
You go too. The call is a concern not only of Pastors, clergy, and men and women religious. The
call is addressed to everyone: lay people as well are personally called by the Lord, from whom
they receive a mission on behalf of the Church and the world. In preaching to the people Saint
Gregory the Great recalls this fact and comments on the parable of the laborers in the vineyard:
"Keep watch over your manner of life, dear people, and make sure that you are indeed the Lord's
laborers. Each person should take into account what he does and consider if he is laboring in
the vineyard of the Lord".
The Council, in particular, with its rich doctrinal, spiritual and pastoral patrimony, has written as
never before on the nature, dignity, spirituality, mission and responsibility of the lay faithful. And
the Council Fathers, re-echoing the call of Christ, have summoned all the lay faithful, both women
and men, to labor in the vineyard: "The Council, then, makes an earnest plea in the Lord's name
that all lay people give a glad, generous, and prompt response to the impulse of the Holy Spirit
and to the voice of Christ, who is giving them an especially urgent invitation at this moment. Young
people should feel that this call is directed to them in particular, and they should respond to it
eagerly and magnanimously. The Lord himself renews his invitation to all the lay faithful to come
closer to him every day, and with the recognition that what is his is also their own  they
ought to associate themselves with him in his saving mission. Once again he sends them into
every town and place where he himself is to come ".
You go into my vineyard too. During the Synod of Bishops, held in Rome, 1-30 October 1987,
these words were re-echoed in spirit once again. Following the path marked out by the Council
and remaining open to the light of the experience of persons and communities from the whole
Church, the Fathers, enriched by preceding Synods, treated in a specific and extensive manner
the topic of the vocation and mission of the lay faithful in the Church and in the world.
In this assembly of bishops there was not lacking a qualified representation of the lay faithful, both
women and men, which rendered a valuable contribution to the Synod proceedings. This was
publicly acknowledged in the concluding homily: "We give thanks that during the course of the
Synod we have not only rejoiced in the participation of the lay faithful (both men and women
auditors), but even more so in that the progress of the Synodal discussions has enabled us to
listen to those whom we invited, representatives of the lay faithful from all parts of the world, from
different countries, and to profit from their experience, their advice and the suggestions they have
offered out of love for the common cause".
In looking over the years following the Council the Synod Fathers have been able to verify how the
Holy Spirit continues to renew the youth of the Church and how he has inspired new aspirations
towards holiness and the participation of so many lay faithful. This is witnessed, among other
ways, in the new manner of active collaboration among priests, religious and the lay faithful; the
active participation in the Liturgy, in the proclamation of the Word of God and catechesis; the
multiplicity of services and tasks entrusted to the lay faithful and led by them; the flourishing of
groups, associations and spiritual movements as well as a lay commitment in the life of the
Church; and in the fuller and meaningful participation of women in the development of society.
At the same time, the Synod has pointed out that the post-conciliar path of the lay faithful has not
been without its difficulties and dangers. In particular, two temptations can be cited which they
have not always known how to avoid: the temptation of being so strongly interested in Church
services and tasks that some fail to become actively engaged in their responsibilities in the
professional, social, cultural and political world; and the temptation of legitimizing the unwarranted
separation of faith from life, that is, a separation of the Gospel's acceptance from the actual living
of the Gospel in various situations in the world.
In the course of its work, the Synod made constant reference to the Second Vatican Council,
whose teaching on the lay faithful, after twenty years, has taken on a surprisingly contemporary
character and at times has carried prophetic significance: such teaching has the capacity of
enlightening and guiding the responses that today must be given to new situations. In reality, the
challenge embraced by the Synod Fathers has been that of indicating the concrete ways through
which this rich "theory" on the lay state expressed by the Council can be translated into authentic
Church "practice". Some situations have made themselves felt because of a certain "novelty" that
they have, and in this sense they can be called post-conciliar, at least chronologically: to these the
Synod Fathers have rightly given a particular attention in the course of their discussion and
reflection. Among those situations to be recalled are those regarding the ministries and Church
services entrusted at present and in the future to the lay faithful, the growth and spread of new
"movements" alongside other group forms of lay involvement, and the place and role of women
both in the Church and in society.
At the conclusion of their work, which proceeded with great commitment, competence and
generosity, the Synod Fathers made known to me their desires and requested that at an
opportune time, a conclusive papal document on the topic of the lay faithful be offered to the
Universal Church.
This Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation intends to take into account all the richness of the Synod
work, from the Lineamenta to the Instrumentum Laboris, from the introductory report, the
presentations of individual bishops and lay persons to the summary reports after discussion in the
Synod hall, from the discussions and reports of the "small groups" to the final "Propositions" and
the concluding "Message". For this reason the present document is not something in
contradistinction to the Synod, but is meant to be a faithful and coherent expression of it, a fruit of
collegiality. As such, the Council of the General Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops and the
Secretariat itself have contributed to its final form.
This Exhortation intends to stir and promote a deeper awareness among all the faithful of the gift
and responsibility they share, both as a group and as individuals, in the communion and mission of
the Church.
The Pressing Needs of the World Today: "Why do you stand here idle all day?"
The basic meaning of this Synod and the most precious fruit desired as a result of it, is the lay
faithful's hearkening to the call of Christ the Lord to work in his vineyard, to take an active,
conscientious and responsible part in the mission of the Church in this great moment in history,
made especially dramatic by occurring on the threshold of the Third Millennium.
A new state of affairs today both in the Church and in social, economic, political and cultural life,
calls with a particular urgency for the action of the lay faithful. If lack of commitment is always
unacceptable, the present time renders it even more so. It is not permissible for anyone to remain
idle.
We continue in our reading of the gospel parable: "And about the eleventh hour he went out and
found others standing; and he said to them, 'Why do you stand here idle all day?'. They said to
him, 'Because no one has hired us'. He said to them, 'You go into the vineyard too'".
Since the work that awaits everyone in the vineyard of the Lord is so great there is no place for
idleness. With even greater urgency the "householder" repeats his invitation: "You go into my
vineyard too".
The voice of the Lord clearly resounds in the depths of each of Christ's followers, who through
faith and the sacraments of Christian initiation is made like to Jesus Christ, is incorporated as a
living member in the Church and has an active part in her mission of salvation. The voice of the
Lord also comes to be heard through the historic events of the Church and humanity, as the
Council reminds us: "The People of God believes that it is led by the Spirit of the Lord, who fills the
whole world. Moved by this faith it tries to discern authentic signs of God's presence and purpose
in the events, the needs, and the longings which it shares with other people of our time. For faith
throws a new light on all things and makes known the full ideal to which God has called each
individual, and thus guides the mind towards solutions which are fully human".
It is necessary, then, to keep a watchful eye on this our world, with its problems and values, its
unrest and hopes, its defeats and triumphs: a world whose economic, social, political and cultural
affairs pose problems and grave difficulties in light of the description provided by the Council in the
Pastoral Constitution, Gaudium et Spes.This, then, is the vineyard; this is the field in which the
faithful are called to l their mission. Jesus wants them, as he wants all his disciples, to be the
"salt of the earth" and the "light of the world". But what is the actual state of affairs
of the "earth" and the "world", for which Christians ought to be "salt" and "light"?
The variety of situations and problems that exist in our world is indeed great and rapidly changing.
For this reason it is all the more necessary to guard against generalizations and unwarranted
simplifications. It is possible, however, to highlight some trends that are emerging in present-day
society. The gospel records that the weeds and the good grain grew together in the farmer's field.
The same is true in history, where in everyday life there often exist contradictions in the exercise
of human freedom, where there is found, side by side and at times closely intertwined, evil and
good, injustice and justice, anguish and hope.
Secularism and the Need for Religion
How can one not notice the ever-growing existence of religious indifference and atheism in its
more varied forms, particularly in its perhaps most widespread form of secularism? Adversely
affected by the impressive triumphs of continuing scientific and technological development and
above all, fascinated by a very old and yet new temptation, namely, that of wishing to become like
God  through the use of a liberty without bounds, individuals cut the religious roots
that are in their hearts; they forget God, or simply retain him without meaning in their lives, or
outrightly reject him, and begin to adore various "idols" of the contemporary world.
The present-day phenomenon of secularism is truly serious, not simply as regards the individual,
but in some ways, as regards whole communities, as the Council has already indicated: "Growing
numbers of people are abandoning religion in practice". At other times I myself have recalled
the phenomenon of de-Christianization that strikes long-standing Christian people and which
continually calls for a re-evangelization.
Human longing and the need tor religion, however, are not able to be totally extinguished. When
persons in conscience have the courage to face the more serious questions of human existenceparticularly questions related to the purpose of life, to suffering and to dying-they are unable to
avoid making their own the words of truth uttered by Saint Augustine: "You have made us for
yourself, O Lord, and our hearts are restless until they rest in you".In the same manner the
present-day world bears witness to this as well, in ever-increasing and impressive ways, through
an openness to a spiritual and transcendent outlook towards life, the renewed interest in religious
research, the return to a sense of the sacred and to prayer, and the demand for freedom to call
upon the name of the Lord.
The Human Person: A Dignity Violated and Exalted
We furthermore call to mind the violations to which the human person is subjected. When the
individual is not recognized and loved in the person's dignity as the living image of God, the human being is exposed to more humiliating and degrading forms of "manipulation", that
most assuredly reduce the individual to a slavery to those who are stronger. "Those who are
stronger" can take a variety of names: an ideology; economic power, political and inhumane
systems, scientific technocracy or the intrusiveness of the mass-media. Once again we find
ourselves before many persons, our sisters and brothers, whose fundamental rights are being
violated, owing to their exceedingly great capacity for endurance and to the clear injustice of
certain civil laws: the right to life and to integrity, the right to a house and to work, the right to a
family and responsible parenthood, the right to participation in public and political life, the right to
freedom of conscience and the practice of religion.
Who is able to count the number of babies unborn because they have been killed in their mothers'
wombs, children abandoned and abused by their own parents, children who grow without affection
and education? In some countries entire populations are deprived of housing and work, lacking the
means absolutely essential for leading a life worthy of a human being, and are deprived even of
those things necessary for their sustenance. There are great areas of poverty and of misery, both
physical and moral, existing at this moment on the periphery of great cities. Entire groups of
human beings have been seriously afflicted.
But the sacredness of the human person cannot be obliterated, no matter how often it is devalued
and violated because it has its unshakable foundation in God as Creator and Father. The
sacredness of the person always keeps returning, again and again.
The sense of the dignity of the human person must be pondered and reaffirmed in stronger. terms.
A beneficial trend is advancing and permeating all peoples of the earth, making them ever more
aware of the dignity of the individual: the person is not at all a "thing" or an "object" to be used, but
primarily a responsible "subject", one endowed with conscience and freedom, called to live
responsibly in society and history, and oriented towards spiritual and religious values.
It has been said that ours is the time of "humanism": paradoxically, some of its atheistic and
secularistic forms arrive at a point where the human person is diminished and annihilated; other
forms of humanism, instead, exalt the individual in such a manner that these forms become a
veritable and real idolatry. There are still other forms, however, in line with the truth, which rightly
acknowledge the greatness and misery of individuals and manifest, sustain and foster the total
dignity of the human person.
The sign and fruit of this trend towards humanism is the growing need for participation, which is
undoubtedly one of the distinctive features of present-day humanity, a true "sign of the times" that
is developing in various fields and in different ways: above all the growing need for participation
regarding women and young people, not only in areas of family and academic life, but also in
cultural, economic, social and political areas. To be leading characters in this development, in
some ways to be creators of a new, more humane culture, is a requirement both for the individual
and for peoples as a whole.
Conflict and Peace
Finally, we are unable to overlook another phenomenon that is quite evident in present-day
humanity: perhaps as never before in history, humanity is daily buffeted by conflict. This is a
phenomenon which has many forms, displayed in a legitimate plurality of mentalities and
initiatives, but manifested in the fatal opposition of persons, groups, categories, nations and blocks
of nations. This opposition takes the form of violence, of terrorism, and of war. Once again, but
with proportions enormously widespread, diverse sectors of humanity today, wishing to show their
"omnipotence", renew the futile experience of constructing the "Tower of Babel",
which spreads confusion, struggle, disintegration and oppression. The human family is thus in
itself dramatically convulsed and wounded.
On the other hand, totally unsupressible is that human longing experienced by individuals and
whole peoples for the inestimable good of peace in justice. The gospel beatitude: "Blessed are the
peacemakers"  finds in the people of our time a new and significant resonance: entire
populations today live, suffer and labor to bring about peace and justice. The participation by so
many persons and groups in the life of society is increasingly pursued today as the way to make a
desired peace become a reality.
On this road we meet many lay faithful generously committed to the social and political field,
working in a variety of institutional forms and those of a voluntary nature in service to the least.
Jesus Christ, the Hope of Humanity
This, then, is the vast field of labor that stands before the laborers sent forth by the
"householder" to work in his vineyard.
In this field the Church is present and working, every one of us, Pastors, priests, deacons,
religious and lay faithful. The adverse situations here mentioned deeply affect the Church: they in
part condition the Church, but they do not crush her, nor even less overcome her, because the
Holy Spirit, who gives her life, sustains her in her mission.
Despite every difficulty, delay and contradiction caused by the limits of human nature, by sin and
by the Evil One, the Church knows that all the forces that humanity employs for communion and
participation find a full response in the intervention of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of man and of
the world.
The Church knows that she is sent forth by him as "sign and instrument of intimate union with God
and of the unity of all the human race".
Despite all this, then, humanity is able to hope. Indeed it must hope: the living and personal
Gospel, Jesus Christ himself, is the "good news" and the bearer of joy that the Church announces
each day, and to whom the Church bears testimony before all people.
The lay faithful have an essential and irreplaceable role in this announcement and in this
testimony: through them the Church of Christ is made present in the various sectors of the world,
as a sign and source of hope and of love.
I AM THE VINE AND YOU ARE THE BRANCHES
The Dignity of the Lay Faithful in the Church as Mystery
The Mystery of the Vine
The Sacred Scriptures use the image of the vine in various ways. In a particular case, the vine
serves to express the Mystery of the People of God. From this perspective which emphasizes the
Church's internal nature, the lay faithful are seen not simply as laborers who work in the vineyard,
but as themselves being a part of the vineyard. Jesus says, "I am the vine, you are the branches".
The prophets in the Old Testament used the image of the vine to describe the chosen people.
Israel is God's vine, the Lord's own work, the joy of his heart: "I have planted you a choice vine"
; "Your mother was like a vine in a vineyard transplanted by the water, fruitful and full of
branches by reason of abundant water" ; "My beloved had a vineyard on a very fertile
hill. He dug it and cleared it of stones and planted it with choice vines...".
Jesus himself once again takes up the symbol of the vine and uses it to illustrate various aspects
of the Kingdom of God: "A man planted a vineyard, and set a hedge around it, and dug a pit for the
winepress, and built a tower and let it out to tenants and went into another country".
John the Evangelist invites us to go further and leads us to discover the mystery of the vine: it is
the figure and symbol not only of the People of God, but of Jesus himself. He is the vine and we,
his disciples, are the branches. He is the "true vine", to which the branches are engrafted to have
life.
The Second Vatican Council, making reference to the various biblical images that help to reveal
the mystery of the Church, proposes again the image of the vine and the branches: "Christ is the
true vine who gives life and fruitfulness to the branches, that is, to us. Through the Church we
abide in Christ, without whom we can do nothing ". The Church herself, then, is the
vine in the gospel. She is mystery because the very life and love of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit
are the gift gratuitously offered to all those who are born of water and the Holy Spirit,
and called to relive the very communion of God and to manifest it and communicate it in history
(mission): "In that day", Jesus says, "you will know tkat I am in my Father and you in me, and I in
you".
Only from inside the Church's mystery of communion is the "identity" of the lay faithful made
known, and their fundamental dignity revealed. Only within the context of this dignity can their
vocation and mission in the Church and in the world be defined.
Who are the Lay Faithful
The Synod Fathers have rightly pointed to the need for a definition of the lay faithful's vocation
and mission in positive terms, through an in-depth study of the teachings of the Second Vatican
Council in light of both recent documentation from the Magisterium and the lived experience of the
Church, guided as she is by the Holy Spirit.
In giving a response to the question "Who are the lay faithful", the Council went beyond previous
interpretations which were predominantly negative. Instead it opened itself to a decidedly positive
vision and displayed a basic intention of asserting the full belonging of the lay faithful to the
Church and to its mystery.
At the same time it insisted on the unique character of their vocation, which is in a special way to
"seek the Kingdom of God by engaging in temporal affairs and ordering them according to the plan
of God". "The term 'lay faithful'" -we read in the Constitution on the Church, Lumen Gentium-" is
here understood to mean all the faithful except those in Holy Orders and those who belong to a
religious state sanctioned by the Church. Through Baptism the lay faithful are made one body with
Christ and are established among the People of God. They are in their own way made sharers in
the priestly, prophetic and kingly office of Christ. They carry out their own part in the mission of the
whole Christian people with respect to the Church and the world".
Pius XII once stated: "The Faithful, more precisely the lay faithful, find themselves on the front
lines of the Church's life; for them the Church is the animating principle for human society.
Therefore, they in particular, ought to have an ever-clearer consciousness not only of belonging to
the Church, but of being the Church, that is to say, the community of the faithful on earth under the
leadership of the Pope, the head of all, and of the Bishops in communion with him. These are the
Church...".
According to the Biblical image of the vineyard, the lay faithful, together with all the other members
of the Church, are branches engrafted to Christ the true vine, and from him derive their life and
fruitfulness.
Incorporation into Christ through faith and Baptism is the source of being a Christian in the
mystery of the Church. This mystery constitutes the Christian's most basic "features" and serves
as the basis for all the vocations and dynamism of the Christian life of the lay faithful. In
Christ who died and rose from the dead, the baptized become a "new creation",
washed clean from sin and brought to life through grace.
Therefore, only through accepting the richness in mystery that God gives to the Christian in
Baptism is it possible to come to a basic description of the lay faithful.
Baptism and the "Newness" of Christian Life
It is no exaggeration to say that the entire existence of the lay faithful has as its purpose to
lead a person to a knowledge of the radical newness of the Christian life that comes from Baptism,
the sacrament of faith, so that this knowledge can help that person live the responsibilities which
arise from that vocation received from God. In arriving at a basic description of the lay faithful we
now more explicitly and directly consider among others the following three fundamental aspects:
Baptism regenerates us in the life ot the Son of God; unites us to Christ and to his Body, the
Church; and anoints us in the Holy Spirit, making us spiritual temples.
Children in the Son
1We here recall Jesus' words to Nicodemus: "Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of
water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God". Baptism, then, is a rebirth, a
regeneration.
In considering this aspect of the gift which comes from Baptism, the apostle Peter breaks out into
song: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! By his great mercy we have been
born anew to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and to an
inheritance which is imperishable, undefiled and unfading". And he calls Christians
those who have been "born anew, not of perishable seed but of imperishable, through the living
and abiding word of God".
With Baptism we become children of God in his only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ. Rising from the
waters of the Baptismal font, every Christian hears again the voice that was once heard on the
banks of the Jordan River: "You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased". From
this comes the understanding that one has been brought into association with the beloved Son,
becoming a child of adoption  and a brother or sister of Christ. In this way the eternal
plan of the Father for each person is realized in history: "For those whom he foreknew he also
predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, in order that he might be the first-born
among many brethren".
It is the Holy Spirit who constitutes the baptized as Children of God and members of Christ's Body.
Saint. Paul reminds the Christians of Corinth of this fact: "For by one Spirit we are all baptized into
one body", so that the apostle can say to the lay faithful: "Now you are the body of
Christ and individually members of it" ; "And because you are sons, God has sent the
Spirit of his Son into our hearts".
We Are One Body in Christ
Regenerated as "Children in the Son", the baptized are inseparably joined together as
"members of Christ and members of the body of the Church", as the Council of Florence
teaches.
Baptism symbolizes and brings about a mystical but real incorporation into the crucified and
glorious body of Christ. Through the sacrament Jesus unites the baptized to his death so as to
unite the recipient to his resurrection. The "old man" is stripped away for a
reclothing with "the new man", that is, with Jesus himself: "For as many of you as were baptized
into Christ have put on Christ". The result is that "we,
though many, are one body in Christ".
In the words of Saint Paul we find again the faithful echo of the teaching of Jesus himself, which
reveals the mystical unity of Christ with his disciples and the disciples with each other, presenting
it as an image and extension of that mystical communion that binds the Father to the Son and the
Son to the Father in the bond of love, the Holy Spirit. Jesus refers to this same unity
in the image of the vine and the branches: "I am the vine, you the branches", an image
that sheds light not only on the deep intimacy of the disciples with Jesus but on the necessity of a
vital communion of the disciples with each other: all are branches of a single vine.
Holy and Living Temples of the Spirit
1In another comparison, using the image of a building, the apostle Peter defines the baptized as
"living stones" founded on Christ, the "corner stone", and destined to "be raised up into a spiritual
building". The image introduces us to another aspect of the newness of Christian life
coming from Baptism and described by the Second Vatican Council: "By regeneration and the
anointing of the Holy Spirit, the baptized are consecrated into a spiritual house".
The Holy Spirit "anoints" the baptized, sealing each with an indelible character ,
and constituting each as a spiritual temple, that is, he fills this temple with the holy presence of
God as a result of each person's being united and likened to Jesus Christ.
With this spiritual "unction", Christians can repeat in an individual way the words of Jesus: "The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He
has sent me to proclaim release to captives and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty
those who are oppressed, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord".
Thus with the outpouring of the Holy Spirit in Baptism and Confirmation, the baptized share in the
same mission of Jesus as the Christ, the Savior-Messiah.
Sharers in the Priestly, Prophetic and Kingly Mission of Jesus Christ
1Referring to the baptized as "new born babes", the apostle Peter writes: "Come to him, to that
living stone, rejected by men but in God's sight chosen and precious; and like living stones be
yourselves built into a spiritual house, to be a holy priesthood to offer spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ... you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy
nation, God's own people, that you may declare the wonderful deeds of him who called you out of
darkness into his marvelous light".
A new aspect to the grace and dignity coming from Baptism is here introduced: the lay faithful
participate, for their part, in the threefold mission of Christ as Priest, Prophet and King. This aspect
has never been forgotten in the living tradition of the Church, as exemplified in the explanation
which Saint. Augustine offers for Psalm 26:"David was anointed king. In those days only a king and a
priest were anointed. These two persons prefigured the one and only priest and king who was to
come, Christ (the name "Christ" means "anointed"). Not only has our head been anointed but we,
his body, have also been anointed... therefore anointing comes to all Christians, even though in
Old Testament times it belonged only to two persons. Clearly we are the Body of Christ because
we are all "anointed" and in him are "christs", that is, "anointed ones", as well as Christ himself,
"The Anointed One". In a certain way, then, it thus happens that with head and body the whole
Christ is formed".
In the wake of the Second Vatican Council, at the beginning of my pastoral ministry, my aim
was to emphasize forcefully the priestly, prophetic and kingly dignity of the entire People of God in
the following words: "He who was born of the Virgin Mary, the carpenter's Son -as he was thought
to be-Son of the living God (confessed by Peter), has come to make us 'a kingdom of priests' The
Second Vatican Council has reminded us of the mystery of this power and of the fact that the
mission of Christ -Priest, Prophet-Teacher, King-continues in the Church. Everyone, the whole
People of God, shares in this threefold mission".
With this Exhortation the lay faithful are invited to take up again and reread, meditate on and
assimilate with renewed understanding and love, the rich and fruitful teaching of the Council which
speaks of their participation in the threefold mission of Christ. Here in summary form are the
essential elements of this teaching.
The lay faithful are sharers in the priestly mission, for which Jesus offered himself on the cross
and continues to be offered in the celebration of the Eucharist for the glory of God and the
salvation of humanity. Incorporated in Jesus Christ, the baptized are united to him and to his
sacrifice in the offering they make of themselves and their daily activities.
Speaking of the lay faithful the Council says: "For their work, prayers and apostolic endeavors,
their ordinary married and family life, their daily labor, their mental and physical relaxation, if
carried out in the Spirit, and even the hardships of life if patiently borne-all of these become
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. During the celebration of
the Eucharist these sacrifices are most lovingly offered to the Father along with the Lord's body.
Thus as worshipers whose every deed is holy, the lay faithful consecrate the world itself to
God".
Through their participation in the prophetic mission of Christ, "who proclaimed the kingdom of his
Father by the testimony of his life and by the power of his world", the lay faithful are given the
ability and responsibility to accept the gospel in faith and to proclaim it in word and deed, without
hesitating to courageously identify and denounce evil. United to Christ, the "great prophet", and in the Spirit made "witnesses" of the Risen Christ, the lay faithful are made sharers in
the appreciation of the Church's supernatural faith, that "cannot err in matters of belief" and
sharers as well in the grace of the word. They are also called to allow
the newness and the power of the gospel to shine out everyday in their family and social life, as
well as to express patiently and courageously in the contradictions of the present age their hope of
future glory even "through the framework of their secular life".
Because the lay faithful belong to Christ, Lord and King of the Universe, they share in his kingly
mission and are called by him to spread that Kingdom in history. They exercise their kingship as
Christians, above all in the spiritual combat in which they seek to overcome in themselves the
kingdom of sin, and then to make a gift of themselves so as to serve, in justice and
in charity, Jesus who is himself present in all his brothers and sisters, above all in the very least.
But in particular the lay faithful are called to restore to creation all its original value. In ordering
creation to the authentic well-being of humanity in an activity governed by the life of grace, they
share in the exercise of the power with which the Risen Christ draws all things to himself and
subjects them along with himself to the Father, so that God might be everything to everyone.
The participation of the lay faithful in the threefold mission of Christ as Priest, Prophet and King
finds its source in the anointing of Baptism, its further development in Confirmation and its
realization and dynamic sustenance in the Holy Eucharist. It is a participation given to each
member of the lay faithful individually, in as much as each is one of the many who form the one
Body of the Lord: in fact, Jesus showers his gifts upon the Church which is his Body and his
Spouse. In such a way individuals are sharers in the threefold mission of Christ in virtue of their
being members of the Church, as Saint. Peter clearly teaches, when he defines the baptized as "a
chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God's own people". Precisely because it
derives from Church communion, the sharing of the lay faithful in the threefold mission of Christ
requires that it be lived and realized in communion and for the increase of communion itself. Saint
Augustine writes: "As we call everyone 'Christians' in virtue of a mystical anointing, so we call
everyone 'priests' because all are members of only one priesthood".
The Lay Faithful and Their Secular Character
The newness of the Christian life is the foundation and title for equality among all the baptized
in Christ, for all the members of the People of God: "As members, they share a common dignity
from their rebirth in Christ, they have the same filial grace and the same vocation to perfection.
They possess in common one salvation, one hope and one undivided charity". Because of the
one dignity flowing from Baptism, each member of the lay faithful, together with ordained ministers
and men and women religious, shares a responsibility for the Church's mission.
But among the lay faithful this one baptismal dignity takes on a manner of life which sets a person
apart, without, however, bringing about a separation from the ministerial priesthood or from men
and women religious. The Second Vatican Council has described this manner of life as the
"secular character": "The secular character is properly and particularly that of the lay faithful".
To understand properly the lay faithful's position in the Church in a complete, adequate and
specific manner it is necesary to come to a deeper theological understanding of their secular
character in light of God's plan of salvation and in the context of the mystery of the Church.
Pope Paul VI said the Church "has an authentic secular dimension, inherent to her inner nature
and mission, which is deeply rooted in the mystery of the Word Incarnate, and which is realized in
different forms through her members".
The Church, in fact, lives in the world, even if she is not of the world. She is sent to
continue the redemptive work of Jesus Christ, which "by its very nature concerns the salvation of
humanity, and also involves the renewal of the whole temporal order".
Certainly all the members of the Church are sharers in this secular dimension but in different
ways. In particular the sharing of the lay faithful has its own manner of realization and function,
which, according to the Council, is "properly and particularly" theirs. Such a manner is designated
with the expression "secular character".
In fact the Council, in describing the lay faithful's situation in the secular world, points to it above
all, as the place in which they receive their call from God: "There they are called by God". This
"place" is treated and presented in dynamic terms: the lay faithful "live in the world, that is, in every
one of the secular professions and occupations. They live in the ordinary circumstances of family
and social life, from which the very fabric of their existence is woven". They are persons who
live an ordinary life in the world: they study, they work, they form relationships as friends,
professionals, members of society, cultures, etc. However, the Council considers their condition
not simply an external and environmental framework, but as a reality destined to find in Jesus
Christ the fullness of its meaning. Indeed it leads to the affirmation that "the Word made flesh
willed to share in human fellowship... He sanctified those human ties, especially family ones, from
which social relationships arise, willingly submitting himself to the laws of his country. He chose to
lead the life of an ordinary craftsman of his own time and place".
The "world" thus becomes the place and the means for the lay faithful to l their Christian
vocation, because the world itself is destined to glorify God the Father in Christ. The Council is
able then to indicate the proper and special sense of the divine vocation which is directed to the
lay faithful. They are not called to abandon the position that they have in the world. Baptism does
not take them from the world at all, as the apostle Paul points out: "So, brethren, in whatever state
each was called, there let him remain with God". On the contrary, he entrusts a
vocation to them that properly concerns their situation in the world. The lay faithful, in fact, "are
called by God so that they, led by the spirit of the Gospel, might contribute to the sanctification of
the world, as from within like leaven, by ling their own particular duties. Thus, especially in this
way of life, resplendent in faith, hope and charity they manifest Christ to others".Thus for the
lay faithful, to be present and active in the world is not only an anthropological and sociological
reality, but in a specific way, a theological and ecclesiological reality as well. In fact, in their
situation in the world God manifests his plan and communicates to them their particular vocation of
"seeking the Kingdom of God by engaging in temporal affairs and by ordering them according to
the plan of God".
Precisely with this in mind the Synod Fathers said: "The secular character of the lay faithful is not
therefore to be defined only in a sociological sense, but most especially in a theological sense.
The term secular must be understood in light of the act of God the creator and redeemer, who has
handed over the world to women and men, so that they may participate in the work of creation,
free creation from the influence of sin and sanctify themselves in marriage or the celibate life, in a
family, in a profession and in the various activities of society".
The lay faithful's position in the Church, then, comes to be fundamentally defined by their newness
in Christian life and distinguished by their secular character.
The images taken from the gospel of salt, light and leaven, although indiscriminately applicable to
all Jesus' disciples, are specifically applied to the lay faithful. They are particularly meaningful
images because they speak not only of the deep involvement and the full participation of the lay
faithful in the affairs of the earth, the world and the human community, but also and above all, they
tell of the radical newness and unique character of an involvement and participation which has as
its purpose the spreading of the Gospel that brings salvation.
Called to Holiness
We come to a full sense of the dignity of the lay faithful if we consider the prime and
fundamental vocation that the Father assigns to each of them in Jesus Christ through the Holy
Spirit: the vocation to holiness, that is, the perfection of charity. Holiness is the greatest testimony
of the dignity conferred on a disciple of Christ.
The Second Vatican Council has significantly spoken on the universal call to holiness. It is
possible to say that this call to holiness is precisely the basic charge entrusted to all the sons and
daughters of the Church by a Council which intended to bring a renewal of Christian life based on
the gospel. This charge is not a simple moral exhortation, but an undeniable requirement
arising from the mystery of the Church: she is the choice vine, whose branches live and grow with
the same holy and life-giving energies that come from Christ; she is the Mystical Body, whose
members share in the same life of holiness of the Head who is Christ; she is the Beloved Spouse
of the Lord Jesus, who delivered himself up for her sanctification. The Spirit that
sanctified the human nature of Jesus in Mary's virginal womb  is the same Spirit that is
abiding and working in the Church to communicate to her the holiness of the Son of God made
man.
It is ever more urgent that today all Christians take up again the way of gospel renewal, welcoming
in a spirit of generosity the invitation expressed by the apostle Peter "to be holy in all conduct". The 1985 Extraordinary Synod, twenty years after the Council, opportunely insisted on
this urgency: "Since the Church in Christ is a mystery, she ought to be considered the sign and
instrument of holiness... Men and women saints have always been the source and origin of
renewal in the most difficult circumstances in the Church's history. Today we have the greatest
need of saints whom we must assiduously beg God to raise up".
Everyone in the Church, precisely because they are members, receive and thereby share in the
common vocation to holiness. In the fullness of this title and on equal par with all other members
of the Church, the lay faithful are called to holiness: "All the faithful of Christ of whatever rank or
status are called to the fullness of Christian life and to the perfection of charity". "All of Christ's
followers are invited and bound to pursue holiness and the perfect fulfillment of their own state of
life".
The call to holiness is rooted in Baptism and proposed anew in the other Sacraments, principally
in the Eucharist. Since Christians are reclothed in Christ Jesus and refreshed by his Spirit, they
are "holy". They therefore have the ability to manifest this holiness and the responsibility to bear
witness to it in all that they do. The apostle Paul never tires of admonishing all Christians to live
"as is fitting among saints".
Life according to the Spirit, whose fruit is holiness, stirs up every baptized
person and requires each to follow and imitate Jesus Christ, in embracing the Beatitudes, in
listening and meditating on the Word of God, in conscious and active participation in the liturgical
and sacramental life of the Church, in personal prayer, in family or in community, in the hunger
and thirst for justice, in the practice of the commandment of love in all circumstances of life and
service to the brethren, especially the least, the poor and the suffering.
The Life of Holiness in the World
The vocation of the lay faithful to holiness implies that life according to the Spirit expresses
itself in a particular way in their involvement in temporal affairs and in their participation in earthly
activities. Once again the apostle admonishes us: "Whatever you do, in word or deed, do
everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him".
Applying the apostle's words to the lay faithful, the Council categorically affirms: "Neither family
concerns nor other secular affairs should be excluded from their religious program of life".
Likewise the Synod Fathers have said: "The unity of life of the lay faithful is of the greatest
importance: indeed they must be sanctified in everyday professional and social life. Therefore, to
respond to their vocation, the lay faithful must see their daily activities as an occasion to join
themselves to God, l his will, serve other people and lead them to communion with God in
Christ".
The vocation to holiness must be recognized and lived by the lay faithful, first of all as an
undeniable and demanding obligation and as a shining example of the infinite love of the Father
that has regenerated them in his own life of holiness. Such a vocation, then, ought to be called an
essential and inseparable element of the new life of Baptism, and therefore an element which
determines their dignity. At the same time the vocation to holiness is intimately connected to
mission and to the responsibility entrusted to the lay faithful in the Church and in the world. In fact,
that same holiness which is derived simply from their participation in the Church's holiness,
represents their first and fundamental contribution to the building of the Church herself, who is the
"Communion of Saints". The eyes of faith behold a wonderful scene: that of a countless number of
lay people, both women and men, busy at work in their daily life and activity, oftentimes far from
view and quite unacclaimed by the world, unknown to the world's great personages but
nonetheless looked upon in love by the Father, untiring laborers who work in the Lord's vineyard.
Confident and steadfast through the power of God's grace, these are the humble yet great builders
of the Kingdom of God in history.
Holiness, then, must be called a fundamental presupposition and an irreplaceable condition for
everyone in ling the mission of salvation within the Church. The Church's holiness is the
hidden source and the infallible measure of the works of the apostolate and of the missionary
effort. Only in the measure that the Church, Christ's Spouse, is loved by him and she, in turn,
loves him, does she become a mother fruitful in the Spirit.
Again we take up the image from the gospel: the fruitfulness and the growth of the branches
depends on their remaining united to the vine. "As the branch cannot bear fruit by itself, unless it
abides in the vine, neither can you, unless you abide in me. I am the vine, you are the branches.
He who abides in me, and I in him, he it is that bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do
nothing".
It is appropriate to recall here the solemn proclamation of beatification and canonization of lay men
and women which took place during the month of the Synod. The entire People of God, and the
lay faithful in particular, can find at this moment new models of holiness and new witnesses of
heroic virtue lived in the ordinary everyday circumstances of human existence. The Synod Fathers
have said: "Particular Churches especially should be attentive to recognizing among their
members the younger men and women of those Churches who have given witness to holiness in
such conditions (everyday secular conditions and the conjugal state) and who can be an example
for others, so that, if the case calls for it, they (the Churches) might propose them to be beatified
and canonized".
At the end of these reflections intended to define the lay faithful's position in the Church, the
celebrated admonition of Saint Leo the Great comes to mind: "Acknowledge, O Christian, your
dignity!". Saint Maximus, Bishop of Turin, in addressing those who had received the holy
anointing of Baptism, repeats the same sentiments: "Ponder the honor that has made you sharers
in this mystery!". All the baptized are invited to hear once again the words of Saint Augustine:
"Let us rejoice and give thanks: we have not only become Christians, but Christ himself... Stand in
awe and rejoice: We have become Christ".
The dignity as a Christian, the source of equality for all members of the Church, guarantees and
fosters the spirit of communion and fellowship, and, at the same time, becomes the hidden
dynamic force in the lay faithful's apostolate and mission. It is a dignity, however, which brings
demands, the dignity of laborers called by the Lord to work in his vineyard: "Upon all the lay
faithful, then, rests the exalted duty of working to assure that each day the divine plan of salvation
is further extended to every person, of every era, in every part of the earth".
I
ALL BRANCHES OF A SINGLE VINE
The Participation of the Lay Faithtul in the Life of Church as Communion
The Mystery of Church Communion
Again we turn to the words of Jesus: "I am the true vine and my Father is the vinedresser...
Abide in me and I in you".
These simple words reveal the mystery of communion that serves as the unifying bond between
the Lord and his disciples, between Christ and the baptized: a living and life-giving communion
through which Christians no longer belong to themselves but are the Lord's very own, as the
branches are one with the vine.
The communion of Christians with Jesus has the communion of God as Trinity, namely, the unity
of the Son to the Father in the gift of the Holy Spirit, as its model and source, and is itself the
means to achieve this communion: united to the Son in the Spirit's bond of love, Christians are
united to the Father.
Jesus continues: "I am the vine, you are the branches". From the communion that
Christians experience in Christ there immediately flows the communion which they experience
with one another: all are branches of a single vine, namely, Christ. In this communion is the
wonderful reflection and participation in the mystery of the intimate life of love in God as Trinity,
Father, Son and Holy Spirit as revealed by the Lord Jesus. For this communion Jesus prays: "that
they may all be one; even as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be in us, so
that the world may believe that you have sent me".
Such communion is the very mystery of the Church, as the Second Vatican Council recalls in the
celebrated words of Saint Cyprian: "The Church shines forth as 'a people made one with the unity
of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit'". We are accustomed to recall this mystery of Church
communion at the beginning of the celebration of the Eucharist, when the priest welcomes all with
the greeting of the Apostle Paul: "The grace of the Lord Jesus, the love of God and the fellowship
of the Holy Spirit be with you all".
After having described the distinguishing features of the lay faithful on which their dignity rests, we
must at this moment reflect on their mission and responsibility in the Church and in the world. A
proper understanding of these aspects, however, can be found only in the living context of the
Church as communion.
Vatican II and the Ecclesiology of Communion
1At the Second Vatican Council the Church again proposed this central idea about herself, as
the 1985 Extraordinary Synod recalls: "The ecclesiology of communion is a central and
fundamental concept in the conciliar documents. Koinonia-communion, finding its source in
Sacred Scripture, was a concept held in great honor in the early Church and in the Oriental
Churches, and this teaching endures to the present day. Much was done by the Second Vatican
Council to bring about a clearer understanding of the Church as communion and its concrete
application to life. What, then, does this complex word 'communion' mean? Its fundamental
meaning speaks of the union with God brought about by Jesus Christ, in the Holy Spirit. The
opportunity for such communion is present in the Word of God and in the Sacraments. Baptism is
the door and the foundation of communion in the Church. The Eucharist is the source and summit
of the whole Christian life. The Body of Christ in the Holy Eucharist
sacramentalizes this communion, that is, it is a sign and actually brings about the intimate bonds
of communion among all the faithful in the Body of Christ which is the Church ".
On the day after the conclusion of the Council Pope Paul VI addressed the faithful in the following
words: "The Church is a communion. In this context what does communion mean? We refer you to
the paragraph in the Catechism that speaks of the sanctorum communionem, 'the Communion of
Saints'. The meaning of the Church is a communion of saints. 'Communion' speaks of a double,
lifegiving participation: the incorporation of Christians into the life of Christ, and the communication
of that life of charity to the entire body of the Faithful, in this world and in the next, union with
Christ and in Christ, and union among Christians, in the Church".
Vatican Council II has invited us to contemplate the mystery of the Church through biblical images
which bring to light the reality of the Church as a communion with its inseparable dimensions: the
communion of each Christian with Christ and the communion of all Christians with one another.
There is the sheepfold, the flock, the vine, the spiritual building, the Holy City. Above all, there
is the image of the Body as set forth by the Apostle Paul. Its doctrine finds a pleasing expression
once again in various passages of the Council's documents. In its turn, the Council has looked
again at the entire history of salvation and has reproposed the image of the Church as the People
of God: "It has pleased God to make people holy and to save them, not merely as individuals
without any mutual bonds, but by making them into a single people, a people which acknowledges
him in truth and serves him in holiness." From its opening lines, the Constitution Lumen Gentium
summarizes this doctrine in a wonderful way: "The Church in Christ is a kind of sacrament, that is,
a sign and instrument of intimate union with God and of the unity of all the human race".
The reality of the Church as Communion is, then, the integrating aspect, indeed the central
content of the "mystery", or rather, the divine plan for the salvation of humanity. For this purpose
ecclesial communion cannot be interpreted in a sufficient way if it is understood as simply a
sociological or a psychological reality. The Church as Communion is the "new" People, the
"messianic" People, the People that "has, for its head, Christ... as its heritage, the dignity and
freedom of God's Children... for its law, the new commandment to love as Christ loved us... for its
goal, the kingdom of God... established by Christ as a communion of life, love and truth".. The
bonds that unite the members of the New People among themselves -and first of all with Christare not those of "flesh and blood", but those of the spirit, more precisely those of the Holy Spirit,
whom all the baptized have received.
In fact, that Spirit is the One who from eternity unites the one and undivided Trinity, that Spirit who
"in the fullness of time"  forever unites human nature to the Son of God, that same
identical Spirit who in the course of Christian generations is the constant and never-ending source
of communion in the Church.
An Organic Communion: Diversity and Complementarity
Ecclesial communion is more precisely likened to an "organic" communion, analogous to that
of a living and functioning body. In fact, at one and the same time it is characterized by a diversity
and a complementarity of vocations and states in life, of ministries, of charisms and
responsibilities. Because of this diversity and complementarity every member of the lay faithful is
seen in relation to the whole body and offers a totally unique contribution on behalf of the whole
body.
Saint Paul insists in a particular way on the organic communion of the Mystical Body of Christ. We
can hear his rich teaching echoed in the following synthesis from the Council: "Jesus Christ"-we
read in the Constitution Lumen Gentium-"by communicating his Spirit to his brothers and sisters,
called together from all peoples, made them mystically into his own body. In that body, the life of
Christ is communicated to those who believe... As all the members of the human body, though
they are many, form one body, so also are the Faithful in Christ. Also, in the
building up of Christ's body there is a diversity of members and functions. There is only one Spirit
who, according to his own richness and the necessities of service, distributes his different gifts for
the welfare of the Church . Among these gifts comes in the first place the grace
given to the apostles to whose authority the Spirit himself subjects even those who are endowed
with charism Furthermore it is this same Spirit, who through his power and through
the intimate bond between the members, produces and urges love among the faithful.
Consequently, if one member suffers anything, all the members suffer it too, and if one member is
honored, all members together rejoice ".
One and the same Spirit is always the dynamic principle of diversity and unity in the Church. Once
again we read in the Constitution Lumen Gentium, "In order that we might be unceasingly renewed in
him, he has shared with us his Spirit who, existing as one and the same being in the
head and in the members, gives life to, unifies and moves the whole body. This he does in such a
way that his work could be compared by the Fathers to the function which the soul as the principle
of life ls in the human body". And in another particularly significant text which is helpful in
understanding not only the organic nature proper to ecclesial communion but also its aspect of
growth toward perfect communion, the Council writes: "The Spirit dwells in the Church and in the
hearts of the Faithful, as in a temple. In them he prays and bears witness
that they are adopted sons. Guiding the Church in the way of all
truth  and unifying her in communion and in the works of service, he bestows upon
her varied hierarchical and charismatic gifts and adorns her with the fruits of his grace.
By the power of the Gospel he makes the Church grow, perpetually
renews her, and leads her to perfect union with her Spouse. The Spirit and the Bride both say to
the Lord Jesus, 'Come!' ".
Church communion then is a gift, a great gift of the Holy Spirit, to be gratefully accepted by the lay
faithful, and at the same time to be lived with a deep sense of responsibility. This is concretely
realized through their participation in the life and mission of the Church, to whose service the lay
faithful put their varied and complementary ministries and charisms.
A member of the lay faithful "can never remain in isolation from the community, but must live in a
continual interaction with others, with a lively sense of fellowship, rejoicing in an equal dignity and
common commitment to bring to fruition the immense treasure that each has inherited. The Spirit
of the Lord gives a vast variety of charisms, inviting people to assume different ministries and
forms of service and reminding them, as he reminds all people in their relationship in the Church,
that what distinguishes persons is not an increase in dignity, but a special and complementary
capacity for service... Thus, the charisms, the ministries, the different forms of service exercised
by the lay faithful exist in communion and on behalf of communion. They are treasures that
complement one another for the good of all and are under the wise guidance of their Pastors".
Ministries and Charisms, the Spirit's Gifts to the Church
2The Second Vatican Council speaks of the ministries and charisms as the gifts of the Holy
Spirit which are given for the building up of the Body of Christ and for its mission of salvation in the
world. Indeed, the Church is directed and guided by the Holy Spirit, who lavishes diverse
hierarchical and charismatic gifts on all the baptized, calling them to be, each in an individual way,
active and coresponsible.
We now turn our thoughts to ministries and charisms as they directly relate to the lay faithful and
to their participation in the life of Church-Communion.
Ministries, Offices and Roles
The ministries which exist and are at work at this time in the Church are all, even in their variety of
forms, a participation in Jesus Christ's own ministry as the Good Shepherd who lays down his life
for the sheep, the humble servant who gives himself without reserve for the salvation
of all. The Apostle Paul is quite clear in speaking about the ministerial constitution of
the Church in apostolic times. In his First Letter to the Corinthians he writes: "And God has
appointed in the Church first apostles, second prophets, third teachers...". In his
Letter to the Ephesians we read: "But the grace was given to each of us according to the measure
of Christ's gift... And his gifts were that some should be apostles, some prophets, some
evangelists, some pastors and teachers, to equip the saints for the work of ministry, for building up
the body of Christ, until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, to mature manhood, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ".
These and other New Testament texts indicate the diversity of ministries as well
as of gifts and ecclesial tasks.
The Ministries Derived from Holy Orders
2In a primary position in the Church are the ordained ministries, that is, the ministries that come
from the Sacrament of Orders. In fact, with the mandate to make disciples of all nations, the Lord Jesus chose and constituted the apostles-seed of the People of the New
Covenant and origin of the Hierarchy -to form and to rule the priestly people. The mission of
the Apostles, which the Lord Jesus continues to entrust to the Pastors of his people, is a true
service, significantly referred to in Sacred Scripture as "diakonia", namely, service or ministry. The
ministries receive the charism of the Holy Spirit from the Risen Christ, in uninterrupted succession
from the apostles, through the Sacrament of Orders: from him they receive the authority and
sacred power to serve the Church, acting in persona Christi Capitis (in the person of Christ, the
Head) and to gather her in the Holy Spirit through the Gospel and the Sacraments.
The ordained ministries, apart from the persons who receive them, are a grace for the entire
Church. These ministries express and realize a participation in the priesthood of Jesus Christ that
is different, not simply in degree but in essence, from the participation given to all the lay faithful
through Baptism and Confirmation. On the other hand, the ministerial priesthood, as the Second
Vatican Council recalls, essentially has the royal priesthood of all the faithful as its aim and is
ordered to it.
For this reason, so as to assure and to increase communion in the Church, particularly in those
places where there is a diversity and complementarity of ministries, Pastors must always
acknowledge that their ministry is fundamentally ordered to the service of the entire People of God. The lay faithful, in turn, must acknowledge that the ministerial priesthood is totally
necessary for their participation in the mission in the Church.
The Ministries, Offices and Roles of the Lay Faithful
2The Church's mission of salvation in the world is realized not only by the ministers in virtue of
the Sacrament of Orders but also by all the lay faithful; indeed, because of their Baptismal state
and their specific vocation, in the measure proper to each person, the lay faithful participate in the
priestly, prophetic and kingly mission of Christ.
The Pastors, therefore, ought to acknowledge and foster the ministries, the offices and roles of the
lay faithful that find their foundation in the Sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation, indeed, for a
good many of them, in the Sacrament of Matrimony.
When necessity and expediency in the Church require it, the Pastors, according to established
norms from universal law, can entrust to the lay faithful certain offices and roles that are connected
to their pastoral ministry but do not require the character of Orders. The Code of Canon Law
states: " When the necessity of the Church warrants it and when ministers are lacking, lay
persons, even if they are not lectors or acolytes, can also supply for certain of their offices,
namely, to exercise the ministry of the word, to preside over liturgical prayers, to confer Baptism,
and to distribute Holy Communion in accord with the prescriptions of the law". However, the
exercise of such tasks does not make Pastors of the lay faithful: in fact, a person is not a minister
simply in performing a task, but through sacramental ordination. Only the Sacrament of Orders
gives the ordained minister a particular participation in the office of Christ, the Shepherd and
Head, and in his Eternal Priesthood. The task exercised in virtue of supply takes its legitimacy
formally and immediately from the official deputation given by the Pastors, as well as from its
concrete exercise under the guidance of ecclesiastical authority.
The recent Synodal Assembly has provided an extensive and meaningful overview of the situation
in the Church on the ministries, offices and roles of the baptized. The Fathers have manifested a
deep appreciation for the contribution of the lay faithful, both women and men, in the work of the
apostolate, in evangelization, sanctification and the Christian animation of temporal affairs, as well
as their generous willingness to supply in situations of emergency and chronic necessity.
Following the liturgical renewal promoted by the Council, the lay faithful themselves have acquired
a more lively awareness of the tasks that they l in the liturgical assembly and its preparation,
and have become more widely disposed to l them: the liturgical celebration, in fact, is a sacred
action not simply of the clergy, but of the entire assembly. It is, therefore, natural that the tasks not
proper to the ordained ministers be led by the lay faithful. In this way there is a natural
transition from an effective involvement of the lay faithful in the liturgical action to that of
announcing the word of God and pastoral care.
In the same Synod Assembly, however, a critical judgment was voiced along with these positive
elements, about a too-indiscriminate use of the word "ministry", the confusion and the equating of
the common priesthood and the ministerial priesthood, the lack of observance of ecclesiastical
laws and norms, the arbitrary interpretation of the concept of "supply", the tendency towards a
"clericalization" of the lay faithful and the risk of creating, in reality, an ecclesial structure of parallel
service to that founded on the Sacrament of Orders.
Precisely to overcome these dangers the Synod Fathers have insisted on the necessity to express
with greater clarity, and with a more precise terminology, both the unity of the Church's mission
in which all the baptized participate, and the substantial diversity of the ministry of Pastors which is
rooted in the Sacrament of Orders, all the while respecting the other ministries, offices and roles in
the Church, which are rooted in the Sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation.
In the first place, then, it is necessary that in acknowledging and in conferring various ministries,
offices and roles on the lay faithful, the Pastors exercise the maximum care to institute them on
the basis of Baptism in which these tasks are rooted. It is also necessary that Pastors guard
against a facile yet abusive recourse to a presumed "situation of emergency" or to "supply by
necessity", where objectively this does not exist or where alternative possibilities could exist
through better pastoral planning.
The various ministries, offices and roles that the lay faithful can legitimately l in the liturgy, in
the transmission of the faith, and in the pastoral structure of the Church, ought to be exercised in
conformity to their specific lay vocation, which is different from that of the sacred ministry. In this
regard the Exhortation Evangelii Nuntiandi, that had such a great part in stimulating the varied
collaboration of the lay faithful in the Church's life and mission of spreading the gospel, recalls that
"their own field of evangelizing activity is the vast and complicated world of politics, society and
economics, as well as the world of culture, of the sciences and the arts, of international life, of the
mass media. It also includes other realities which are open to evangelization, such as human love,
the family, the education of children and adolescents, professional work, and suffering. The more
Gospel-inspired lay people there are engaged in these realities, clearly involved in them,
competent to promote them and conscious that they must exercise to the full their Christian
powers which are often repressed and buried, the more these realities will be at the service of the
Kingdom of God and therefore at the service of salvation in Jesus Christ, without in any way losing
or sacrificing their human content but rather pointing to a transcendent dimension which is often
disregarded".
In the course of Synod work the Fathers devoted much attention to the Lectorate and the
Acolytate. While in the past these ministries existed in the Latin Church only as spiritual steps on
route to the ordained ministry, with the motu proprio of Paul VI, Ministeria Quaedam (15 August
1972), they assumed an autonomy and stability, as well as a possibility of their being given to the
lay faithful, albeit, only to men. This same fact is expressed in the new Code of Canon Law. At
this time the Synod Fathers expressed the desire that "the motu proprio Ministeria Quaedam be
reconsidered, bearing in mind the present practice of local churches and above all indicating
criteria which ought to be used in choosing those destined for each ministry".
In this regard a Commission was established to respond to this desire voiced by the Synod
Fathers, specifically to provide an in-depth study of the various theological, liturgical, juridical and
pastoral consideration which are associated with the great increase today of the ministries
entrusted to the lay faithful.
While the conclusions of the Commission's study are awaited, a more ordered and fruitful ecclesial
practice of the ministries entrusted to the lay faithful can be achieved if all the particular Churches
faithfully respect the above mentioned theological principles, especially the essential difference
between the ministerial priesthood and the common priesthood, and the difference between the
ministries derived from the Sacrament of Orders and those derived from the Sacraments of
Baptism and Confirmation.
Charisms
2The Holy Spirit, while bestowing diverse ministries in Church communion, enriches it still
further with particular gifts or promptings of grace, called charisms. These can take a great variety
of forms, both as a manifestation of the absolute freedom of the Spirit who abundantly supplies
them, and as a response to the varied needs of the Church in history. The description and the
classification given to these gifts in the New Testament are an indication of their rich variety. "To
each is given the manifestation of the Spirit for the common good. To one is given through the
Spirit the utterance of wisdom, and to another the utterance of knowledge according to the same
Spirit, to another faith by the same Spirit, to another gifts of healing by the one Spirit, to another
the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another the ability to distinguish between spirits,
to another various kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues".
Whether they be exceptional and great or simple and ordinary, the charisms are graces of the
Holy Spirit that have, directly or indirectly, a usefulness for the ecclesial community, ordered as
they are to the building up of the Church, to the well-being of humanity and to the needs of the
world.
Even in our own times there is no lack of a fruitful manifestation of various charisms among the
faithful, women and men. These charisms are given to individual persons, and can even be shared
by others in such ways as to continue in time a precious and effective heritage, serving as a
source of a particular spiritual affinity among persons. In referring to the apostolate of the lay
faithful the Second Vatican Council writes: "For the exercise of the apostolate the Holy Spirit who
sanctifies the People of God through the ministry and the sacraments gives the faithful special
gifts as well, 'allotting them to each one as he wills', so that each
might place 'at the service of others the grace received' and become 'good stewards of God's
varied grace', and build up thereby the whole body in charity ".
By a logic which looks to the divine source of this giving, as the Council recalls, the gifts of the
Spirit demand that those who have received them exercise them for the growth of the whole
Church.
The charisms are received in gratitude both on the part of the one who receives them, and also on
the part of the entire Church. They are in fact a singularly rich source of grace for the vitality of the
apostolate and for the holiness of the whole Body of Christ, provided that they be gifts that come
truly from the Spirit and are exercised in full conformity with the authentic promptings of the Spirit.
In this sense the discernment of charisms is always necessary. Indeed, the Synod Fathers have
stated: "The action of the Holy Spirit, who breathes where he will, is not always easily recognized
and received. We know that God acts in all Christians, and we are aware of the benefits which
flow from charisms both for individuals and for the whole Christian community. Nevertheless, at
the same time we are also aware of the power of sin and how it can disturb and confuse the life of
the faithful and of the community".
For this reason no charism dispenses a person from reference and submission to the Pastors of
the Church. The Council clearly states: "Judgment as to their (charisms) genuineness and proper
use belongs to those who preside over the Church, and to whose special competence it belongs,
not indeed to extinguish the Spirit, but to test all things and hold fast to what is good",
so that all the charisms might work together, in their diversity and
complementarity, for the common good.
The Lay Faithful's Participation in the Life of the Church
The lay faithful participate in the life of the Church not only in exercising their tasks and
charisms, but also in many other ways.
Such participation finds its first and necessary expression in the life and mission of the particular
Church, in the diocese in which "the Church of Christ, one, holy, catholic and apostolic, is truly
present and at work".
The Particular Churches and the Universal Church
For an adequate participation in ecclesial life the lay faithful absolutely need to have a clear and
precise vision of the particular Church with its primordial bond to the universal Church. The
particular Church does not come about from a kind of fragmentation of the universal Church, nor
does the universal Church come about by a simple amalgamation of particular Churches. But
there is a real, essential and constant bond uniting each of them and this is why the universal
Church exists and is manifested in the particular Churches. For this reason the Council says that
the particular Churches "are constituted after the model of the universal Church; it is in and from
these particular Churches that there come into being the one and unique Catholic Church".
The same Council strongly encourages the lay faithful actively to live out their belonging to the
particular Church, while at the same time assuming an ever-increasing "catholic" spirit: "Let the lay
faithful constantly foster"-we read in the Decree on the Apostolate of Lay People- "a feeling for
their own diocese, of which the parish is a kind of cell, and be always ready at their bishops'
invitation to participate in diocesan projects. Indeed, if the needs of cities and rural areas are to be
met, lay people should not limit their cooperation to the parochial or diocesan boundaries but strive
to extend it to interparochial, interdiocesan, national and international fields, the more so because
the daily increase in population mobility, the growth of mutual bonds, and the ease of
communication no longer allow any sector of society to remain closed in upon itself. Thus they
should be concerned about the needs of the People of God scattered throughout the world".
In this sense, the recent Synod has favored the creation of Diocesan Pastoral Councils, as a
recourse at opportune times. In fact, on a diocesan level this structure could be the principle form
of collaboration, dialogue, and discernment as well. The participation of the lay faithful in these
Councils can broaden resources in consultation and the principle of collaboration-and in certain
instances also in decision-making - if applied in a broad and determined manner.
The participation of the lay faithful in Diocesan Synods and in local Councils, whether provincial or
plenary, is envisioned by the Code of Canon Law. These structures could contribute to Church
communion and the mission of the particular Church, both in its own surroundings and in relation
to the other particular Churches of the ecclesiastical province or Episcopal Conference.
Episcopal Conferences are called to evaluate the most oportune way of developing the
consultation and the collaboration of the lay faithful, women and men, at a national or regional
level, so that they may consider well the problems they share and manifest better the communion
of the whole Church.
The Parish
The ecclesial community, while always having a universal dimension, finds its most immediate
and visible expression in the parish. It is there that the Church is seen locally. In a certain sense it
is the Church living in the midst of the homes of her sons and daughters.
It is necessary that in light of the faith all rediscover the true meaning of the parish, that is, the
place where the very "mystery" of the Church is present and at work, even if at times it is lacking
persons and means, even if at other times it might be scattered over vast territories or almost not
to be found in crowded and chaotic modern sections of cities. The parish is not principally a
structure, a territory, or a building, but rather, "the family of God, a fellowship afire with a unifying
spirit", "a familial and welcoming home", the "community of the faithful". Plainly and
simply, the parish is founded on a theological reality, because it is a Eucharistic community.
This means that the parish is a community properly suited for celebrating the Eucharist, the living
source for its upbuilding and the sacramental bond of its being in full communion with the whole
Church. Such suitableness is rooted in the fact that the parish is a community of faith and an
organic community, that is, constituted by the ordained ministers and other Christians, in which the
pastor-who represents the diocesan bishop-is the hierarchical bond with the entire particular
Church.
Since the Church's task in our day is so great its accomplishment cannot be left to the parish
alone. For this reason the Code of Canon Law provides for forms of collaboration among parishes
in a given territory and recommends to the bishop's care the various groups of the Christian
Faithful, even the unbaptized who are not under his ordinary pastoral care. There are many
other places and forms of association through which the Church can be present and at work. All
are necessary to carry out the word and grace of the Gospel and to correspond to the various
circumstances of life in which people find themselves today. In a similar way there exist in the
areas of culture, society, education, professions, etc. many other ways for spreading the faith and
other settings for the apostolate which cannot have the parish as their center and origin.
Nevertheless, in our day the parish still enjoys a new and promising season. At the beginning of
his pontificate, Paul VI addressed the Roman clergy in these words: "We believe simply that this
old and venerable structure of the parish has an indispensable mission of great contemporary
importance: to create the basic community of the Christian people; to initiate and gather the
people in the accustomed expression of liturgical life; to conserve and renew the faith in the
people of today; to serve as the school for teaching the salvific message of Christ; to put solidarity
in practice and work the humble charity of good and brotherly works".
The Synod Fathers for their part have given much attention to the present state of many parishes
and have called for a greater effort in their renewal: "Many parishes, whether established in
regions affcted by urban progress or in missionary territory, cannot do their work effectively
because they lack material resources or ordained men or are too big geographically or because of
the particular circumstances of some Christians (e.g. exiles and migrants). So that all parishes of
this kind may be truly communities of Christians, local ecclesial authorities ought to foster the
following: a) adaptation of parish structures according to the full flexibility granted by canon law,
especially in promoting participation by the lay faithfulinpastoral responsibilities; b) small, basic or
so-called "living" communities, where the faithful can communicate the Word of God and express it
in service and love to one another; these communities are true expressions of ecclesial
communion and centers of evangelization, in communion with their pastors". For the renewal
of parishes and for a better assurance of their effectiveness in work, various forms of cooperation
even on the institutional level ought to be fostered among diverse parishes in the same area.
The Apostolic Commitment in the Parish
It is now necessary to look more closely at the communion and participation of the lay faithful
in parish life. In this regard all lay men and women are called to give greater attention to a
particularly meaningful, stirring and incisive passage from the Council: "Their activity within Church
communities is so necessary that without it the apostolate of the Pastors is generally unable to
achieve its full effectiveness".
This is indeed a particularly important affirmation, which evidently must be interpreted in light of
the "ecclesiology of communion". Ministries and charisms, being diverse and complementary, are
all necessary for the Church to grow, each in its own way.
The lay faithful ought to be ever more convinced of the special meaning that their commitment to
the apostolate takes on in their parish. Once again the Council authoritatively places it in relief:
"The parish offers an outstanding example of the apostolate on the community level, inasmuch as
it brings together the many human differences found within its boundaries and draws them into the
universality of the Church. The lay faithful should accustom themselves to working in the parish in
close union with their priests, bringing to the Church community their own and the world's
problems as well as questions concerning human salvation, all of which need to be examined
together and solved through general discussion. As far as possible the lay faithful ought to
collaborate in every apostolic and missionary undertaking sponsored by their own ecclesial
family".
The Council's mention of examining and solving pastoral problems "by general discussion" ought
to find its adequate and structured development through a more convinced, extensive and decided
appreciation for "Parish Pastoral Councils", on which the Synod Fathers have rightly insisted.
In the present circumstances the lay faithful have the ability to do very much and, therefore, ought
to do very much towards the growth of an authentic ecclesial communion in their parishes in order
to reawaken missionary zeal towards nonbelievers and believers themselves who have
abandoned the faith or grown lax in the Christian life.
If indeed, the parish is the Church placed in the neighborhoods of humanity, it lives and is at work
through being deeply inserted in human society and intimately bound up with its aspirations and its
dramatic events. Oftentimes the social context, especially in certain countries and environments, is
violently shaken by elements of disintegration and de-humanization. The individual is lost and
disoriented, but there always remains in the human heart the desire to experience and cultivate
caring and personal relationships. The response to such a desire can come from the parish, when,
with the lay faithful's participation, it adheres to its fundamental vocation and mission, that is, to be
a "place" in the world for the community of believers to gather together as a "sign" and
"instrument" of the vocation of all to communion, in a word, to be a house of welcome to all and a
place of service to all, or, as Pope John XXIII was fond of saying, to be the "village fountain" to
which all would have recourse in their thirst.
The Forms of Participation in the Life of the Church
The lay faithful together with the clergy and women and men religious, make up the one
People of God and the Body of Christ.
Being "members" of the Church takes nothing away from the fact that each Christian as an
individual is "unique and irrepeatable". On the contrary, this belonging guarantees and fosters the
profound sense of that uniqueness and irrepeatability, in so far as these very qualities are the
source of variety and richness for the whole Church. Therefore, God calls the individual in Jesus
Christ, each one personally by name. In this sense, the Lord's words "You go into my vineyard
too", directed to the Church as a whole, come specially addressed to each member individually.
Because of each member's unique and irrepeatable character, that is, one's identity and actions
as a person, each individual is placed at the service of the growth of the ecclesial community
while, at the same time, singularly receiving and sharing in the common richness of all the Church.
This is the "Communion of Saints" which we profess in the Creed. The good of all becomes the
good of each one and the good of each one becomes the good of all. "In the Holy Church", writes
Saint Gregory the Great, "all are nourished by each one and each ones is nourished by all".
Individual Forms of Participation
Above all, each member of the lay faithful should always be fully aware of being a "member of the
Church" yet entrusted with a unique task which cannot be done by another and which is to be
led for the good of all. From this perspective the Council's insistence on the absolute necessity
of an apostolate exercised by the individual takes on its full meaning: "The apostolate exercised by
the individual-which flows abundantly from a truly Christian life is the origin and
condition of the whole lay apostolate, even in its organized expression, and admits no substitute.
Regardless of circumstance, all lay persons (including those who have no opportunity or possibility
for collaboration in associations) are called to this type of apostolate and obliged to engage in it.
Such an apostolate is useful at all times and places, but in certain circumstances it is the only one
available and feasible".
In the apostolate exercised by the individual, great riches are waiting to be discovered through an
intensification of the missionary effort of each of the lay faithful. Such an individual form of
apostolate can contribute greatly to a more extensive spreading of the Gospel, indeed it can reach
as many places as there are daily lives of individual members of the lay faithful. Furthermore, the
spread of the gospel will be continual, since a person's life and faith will be one. Likewise the
spread of the gospel will be particularly incisive, because in sharing fully in the unique conditions
of the life, work, difficulties and hopes of their sisters and brothers, the lay faithful will be able to
reach the hearts of their neighbors, friends, and colleagues, opening them to a full sense of human
existence, that is, to communion with God and with all people.
Group Forms of Participation
2Church communion, already present and at work in the activities of the individual, finds its
specific expression in the lay faithful's working together in groups, that is, in activities done with
others in the course of their responsible participation in the life and mission of the Church.
In recent days the phenomenon of lay people associating among themselves has taken on a
character of particular variety and vitality. In some ways lay associations have always been
present throughout the Church's history as various confraternities, third orders and sodalities
testify even today. However, in modern times such lay groups have received a special stimulus,
resulting in the birth and spread of a multiplicity of group forms: associations, groups,
communities, movements. We can speak of a new era of group endeavors of the lay faithful. In
fact, "alongside the traditional forming of associations, and at times coming from their very roots,
movements and new sodalities have sprouted, with a specific feature and purpose, so great is the
richness and the versatility of resources that the Holy Spirit nourishes in the ecclesial community,
and so great is the capacity of initiative and the generosity of our lay people".
Oftentimes these lay groups show themselves to be very diverse from one another in various
aspects, in their external structures, in their procedures and training methods, and in the fields in
which they work. However, they all come together in an all-inclusive and profound convergence
when viewed from the perspective of their common purpose, that is, the responsible participation
of all of them in the Church'smission of carrying forth the Gospel of Christ, the source of hope for
humanity and the renewal of society.
The actual formation of groups of the lay faithful for spiritual purposes or for apostolic work comes
from various sources and corresponds to different demands. In fact, their formation itself
expresses the social nature of the person and for this reason leads to a more extensive and
incisive effectiveness in work. In reality, a "cultural" effect can be accomplished through work done
not so much by an individual alone but by an individual as "a social being", that is, as a member of
a group, of a community, of an association, or of a movement. Such work is, then, the source and
stimulus leading to the transformation of the surroundings and society as well as the fruit and sign
of every other transformation in this regard. This is particularly true in the context of a pluralistic
and fragmented society-the case in so many parts of the world today-and in light of the problems
which have become greatly complex and difficult. On the other hand, in a secularized world, above
all, the various group forms of the apostolate can represent for many a precious help for the
Christian life in remaining faithful to the demands of the gospel and to the commitment to the
Church's mission and the apostolate.
Beyond this, the profound reason that justifies and demands the lay faithful's forming of lay groups
comes from a theology based on ecclesiology, as the Second Vatican Council clearly
acknowledged in referring to the group apostolate as a "sign of communion and of unity of the
Church of Christ".
It is a "sign" that must be manifested in relation to "communion" both in the internal and external
aspects of the various group forms and in the wider context of the Christian community. As
mentioned, this reason based on ecclesiology explains, on one hand, the "right" of lay
associations to form, and on the other, the necessity of "criteria" for discerning the authenticity of
the forms which such groups take in the Church.
First of all, the freedom for lay people in the Church to form such groups is to be acknowledged.
Such liberty is a true and proper right that is not derived from any kind of "concession" by
authority, but flows from the Sacrament of Baptism, which calls the lay faithful to participate
actively in the Church's communion and mission. In this regard the Council is quite clear: "As long
as the proper relationship is kept to Church authority, the lay faithful have the right to found and
run such associations and to join those already existing". A citation from the recently
published Code of Canon Law affirms it as well: "The Christian faithful are at liberty to found and
govern associations for charitable and religious purposes or for the promotion of the Christian
vocation in the world; they are free to hold meetings to pursue these purposes in common".
It is a question of a freedom that is to be acknowledged and guaranteed by ecclesial authority and
always and only to be exercised in Church communion. Consequently, the right of the lay faithful
to form groups is essentially in relation to the Church's life of communion and to her mission.
"Criteria of Ecclesiality"for Lay Groups
It is always from the perspective of the Church's communion and mission, and not in
opposition to the freedom to associate, that one understands the necessity of having clear and
definite criteria for discerning and recognizing such lay groups, also called "Criteria of Ecclesiality".
The following basic criteria might be helpful in evaluating an association of the lay faithful in the
Church:
- The primacy given to the call of every Christian to holiness, as it is manifested "in the fruits of
grace which the spirit produces in the faithful" and in a growth towards the fullness of
Christian life and the perfection of charity.
In this sense whatever association of the lay faithful there might be, it is always called to be more
of an instrument leading to holiness in the Church, through fostering and promoting "a more
intimate unity between the everyday life of its members and their faith".
- The responsibility of professing the Catholic faith, embracing and proclaiming the truth about
Christ, the Church and humanity, in obedience to the Church's Magisterium, as the Church
interprets it. For this reason every association of the lay faithful must be a forum where the faith is
proclaimed as well as taught in its total content.
- The witness to a strong and authentic communion in filial relationship to the Pope, in total
adherence to the belief that he is the perpetual and visible center of unity of the universal
Church, and with the local Bishop, "the visible principle and foundation of unity" in the
particular Church, and in "mutual esteem for all forms of the Church's apostolate".
The communion with Pope and Bishop must be expressed in loyal readiness to embrace the
doctrinal teachings and pastoral initiatives of both Pope and Bishop. Moreover, Church
communion demands both an acknowledgment of a legitimate plurality of forms in the associations
of the lay faithful in the Church and at the same time, a willingness to cooperate in working
together.
- Conformity to and participation in the Church's apostolic goals, that is, "the evangelization and
sanctification of humanity and the Christian formation of people's conscience, so as to enable
them to infuse the spirit of the gospel into the various communities and spheres of life".
From this perspective, every one of the group forms of the lay faithful is asked to have a
missionary zeal which will increase their effectiveness as participants in a re-evangelization.
- A commitment to a presence in human society, which in light of the Church's social doctrine,
places it at the service of the total dignity of the person.
Therefore, associations of the lay faithful must become fruitful outlets for participation and
solidarity in bringing about conditions that are more just and loving within society.
The fundamental criteria mentioned at this time find their verification in the actual fruits that various
group forms show in their organizational life and the works they perform, such as: the renewed
appreciation for prayer, contemplation, liturgical and sacramental life, the reawakening of
vocations to Christian marriage, the ministerial priesthood and the consecrated life; a readiness to
participate in programs and Church activities at the local, national and international levels; a
commitment to catechesis and a capacity for teaching and forming Christians; a desire to be
present as Christians in various settings of social life and the creation and awakening of
charitable, cultural and spiritual works; the spirit of detachment and evangelical poverty leading to
a greater generosity in charity towards all; conversion to the Christian life or the return to Church
communion of those baptized members who have fallen away from the faith.
The Pastors in Service to Communion
3The Pastors of the Church even if faced with possible and understandable difficulties as a
result of such associations and the process of employing new forms, cannot renounce the service
provided by their authority, not simply for the well-being of the Church, but also for the well-being
of the lay associations themselves. In this sense they ought to accompany their work of
discernment with guidance and, above all, encouragement so that lay associations might grow in
Church communion and mission.
It is exceedingly opportune that some new associations and movements receive official
recognition and explicit approval from competent Church authority to facilitate their growth on both
the national and international level. The Council has already spoken in this regard: "Depending on
its various forms and goals, the lay apostolate provides for different types of relationships with the
hierarchy... Certain forms of the lay apostolate are given explicit recognition by the hierarchy,
though in different ways. Because of the demands of the common good of the Church, moreover,
ecclesial authority can select and promote in a particular way some of the apostolic associations
and projects which have an immediately spiritual purpose, thereby assuming in them a special
responsibility".
Among the various forms of the lay apostolate which have a particular relationship to the
hierarchy, the Synod Fathers have singled out various movements and associations of Catholic
Action in which "indeed, in this organic and stable form, the lay faithful may freely associate under
the movement of the Holy Spirit, in communion with their bishop and priests, so that in a way
proper to their vocation and with some special method they might be of service through their
faithfulness and good works to promote the growth of the entire Christian community, pastoral
activities and infusing every aspect of life with the gospel spirit".
The Pontifical Council for the Laity has the task of preparing a list of those associations which
have received the official approval of the Holy See, and, at the same time, of drawing up, together
with the Pontifical Council for the Union of Christians, the basic conditions on which this approval
might be given to ecumenical associations in which there is a majority of Catholics, and
determining those cases in which such an approval is not possible.
All of us, Pastors and lay faithful, have the duty to promote and nourish stronger bonds and mutual
esteem, cordiality and collaboration among the various forms of lay associations. Only in this way
can the richness of the gifts and charisms that the Lord oflers us bear their fruitful contribution in
building the common house: "For the sound building of a common house it is necessary,
furthermore, that every spirit of antagonism and conflict be put aside and that the competition be in
outdoing one another in showing honor, in attaining a mutual affection, a will
towards collaboration, with patience, far-sightedness, and readiness to sacrifice which will at times
be required".
So as to render thanks to God for the great gift of Church communion which is the reflection in
time of the eternal and ineffable communion of the love of God, Three in One, we once again
consider Jesus' words: "I am the vine, you are the branches". The awareness of the gift
ought to be accompanied by a strong sense of responsibility for its use: it is, in fact, a gift that, like
the talent of the gospel parable, must be put to work in a life of ever-increasing communion.
To be responsible for the gift of communion means, first of all, to be committed to overcoming
each temptation to division and opposition that works against the Christian life with its
responsibility in the apostolate. The cry of Saint Paul continues to resound as a reproach to those
who are "wounding the Body of Christ": "What I mean is that each one of you says, 'I belong to
Paul', or 'I belong to Cephas', or 'I belong to Christ!' Is Christ divided?". No, rather
let these words of the apostle sound a persuasive call: " I appeal to you, brethren, by the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that all of you agree and that there be no dissensions among you, but that
you be united in the same mind and the same judgment".
Thus the life of Church communion will become a sign for all the world and a compelling force that
will lead persons to faith in Christ: "that they may all be one; even as you, Father, are in me and I
in you, that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that you have sent me". In such a way communion leads to mission, and mission itself to communion.
II
I HAVE APPOINTED YOU TO GO FORTH AND BEAR FRUIT
The Coresponsibility of the Lay Faithful in the Church as Mission
Mission to Communion
3We return to the biblical image of the vine and the branches, which immediately and quite
appropriately lends itself to a consideration of fruitfulness and life. Engrafted to the vine and
brought to life, the branches are expected to bear fruit: "He who abides in me, and I in him, he it is
that bears much fruit". Bearing fruit is an essential demand of life in Christ and life in the
Church. The person who does not bear fruit does not remain in communion: "Each branch of mine
that bears no fruit, he (my Father) takes away".
Communion with Jesus, which gives rise to the communion of Christians among themselves, is an
indispensable condition for bearing fruit: "Apart from me you can do nothing". And
communion with others is the most magnificent fruit that the branches can give: in fact, it is the gift
of Christ and His Spirit.
At this point communion begets communion: essentially it is likened to a mission on behalf of
communion. In fact, Jesus says to his disciples: "You did not choose me, but I chose you and
appointed you that you should go and bear fruit and that your fruit should abide".
Communion and mission are profoundly connected with each other, they interpenetrate and
mutually imply each other, to the point that communion represents both the source and the fruit of
mission: communion gives rise to mission and mission is accomplished in communion. It is always
the one and the same Spirit who calls together and unifies the Church and sends her to preach the
Gospel "to the ends of the earth". On her part, the Church knows that the communion
received by her as a gift is destined for all people. Thus the Church feels she owes to each
individual and to humanity as a whole the gift received from the Holy Spirit that pours the charity of
Jesus Christ into the hearts of believers, as a mystical force for internal cohesion and external
growth. The mission of the Church flows from her own nature. Christ has willed it to be so: that of
"sign and instrument... of unity of all the human race". Such a mission has the purpose of
making everyone know and live the "new" communion that the Son of God made man introduced
into the history of the world. In this regard, then, the testimony of John the Evangelist defines in an
undeniable way the blessed end towards which the entire mission of the Church is directed: "That
which we have seen and heard we proclaim also to you, so that you may have fellowship with us;
and our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ".
In the context of Church mission, then, the Lord entrusts a great part of the responsibility to the lay
faithful, in communion with all other members of the People of God. This fact, fully understood by
the Fathers of the Second Vatican Council, recurred with renewed clarity and increased vigor in all
the works of the Synod: "Indeed, Pastors know how much the lay faithful contribute to the welfare
of the entire Church. They also know that they themselves were not established by Christ to
undertake alone the entire saving mission of the Church towards the world, but they understand
that it is their exalted office to be shepherds of the lay faithful and also to recognize the latter's
services and charisms that all according to their proper roles may cooperate in this common
undertaking with one heart".
Proclaiming the Gospel
3The lay faithful, precisely because they are members of the Church, have the vocation and
mission of proclaiming the Gospel: they are prepared for this work by the sacraments of Christian
initiation and by the gifts of the Holy Spirit.
In a very clear and significant passage from the Second Vatican Council we read: "As sharers in
the mission of Christ, priest, prophet and king, the lay faithful have an active part to play in the life
and activity of the Church... Strengthened by their active participation in the liturgical life of their
community, they are eager to do their share in apostolic works of that community. They lead to the
Church people who are perhaps far removed from it; they earnestly cooperate in presenting the
Word of God, especially by means of catechetical instruction; and offer their special skills to make
the care of souls and the administration of the temporal goods of the Church more efficient".
The entire mission of the Church, then, is concentrated and manifested in evangelization. Through
the winding passages of history the Church has made her way under the grace and the command
of Jesus Christ: "Go into all the world and preach the gospel to the whole creation"  "...
and lo, I am with you always, until the close of the age". "To evangelize", writes Paul VI,
"is the grace and vocation proper to the Church, her most profound identity".
Through evangelization the Church is built up into a community of faith: more precisely, into a
community that confesses the faith in full adherence to the Word of God which is celebrated in the
Sacraments, and lived in charity, the principle of Christian moral existence. In fact, the "good
news" is directed to stirring a person to a conversion of heart and life and a clinging to Jesus
Christ as Lord and Savior; to disposing a person to receive Baptism and the Eucharist and to
strengthen a person in the prospect and realization of new life according to the Spirit.
Certainly the command of Jesus: "Go and preach the Gospel" always maintains its vital value and
its ever-pressing obligation. Nevertheless, the present situation, not only of the world but also of
many parts of the Church, absolutely demands that the word of Christ receive a more ready and
generous obedience. Every disciple is personally called by name; no disciple can withhold making
a response: "Woe to me, if I do not preach the gospel".
The Hour Has Come for a Re-Evangelization
3Whole countries and nations where religion and the Christian life were formerly flourishing and
capable of fostering a viable and working community of faith, are now put to a hard test, and in
some cases, are even undergoing a radical transformation, as a result of a constant spreading of
an indifference to religion, of secularism and atheism. This particularly concerns countries and
nations of the so-called First World, in which economic well-being and consumerism, even if
coexistent with a tragic situation of poverty and misery, inspires and sustains a life lived "as if God
did not exist". This indifference to religion and the practice of religion devoid of true meaning in the
face of life's very serious problems, are not less worrying and upsetting when compared with
declared atheism. Sometimes the Christian faith as well, while maintaining some of the externals
of its tradition and rituals, tends to be separated from those moments of human existence which
have the most significance, such as, birth, suffering and death. In such cases, the questions and
formidable enigmas posed by these situations, if remaining without responses, expose
contemporary people to an inconsolable delusion or to the temptation of eliminating the truly
humanizing dimension of life implicit in these problems.
On the other hand, in other regions or nations many vital traditions of piety and popular forms of
Christian religion are still conserved; but today this moral and spiritual patrimony runs the risk of
being dispersed under the impact of a multiplicity of processes, including secularization and the
spread of sects. Only a re-evangelization can assure the growth of a clear and deep faith, and
serve to make these traditions a force for authentic freedom.
Without doubt a mending of the Christian fabric of society is urgently needed in all parts of the
world. But for this to come about what is needed is to first remake the Christian fabric of the
ecclesial community itself present in these countries and nations.
At this moment the lay faithful, in virtue of their participation in the prophetic mission of Christ, are
fully part of this work of the Church. Their responsibility, in particular, is to testify how the Christian
faith constitutes the only fully valid response-consciously perceived and stated by all in varying
degrees-to the problems and hopes that life poses to every person and society. This will be
possible if the lay faithful will know how to overcome in themselves the separation of the Gospel
from life, to again take up in their daily activities in family, work and society, an integrated
approach to life that is fully brought about by the inspiration and strength of the Gospel.
To all people of today I once again repeat the impassioned cry with which I began my pastoral
ministry: "Do not be afraid! Open, in deed, open wide the doors to Christ!
Open to his saving power the confines of states, and systems political and economic, as well as
the vast fields of culture, civilization, and development. Do not be afraid! Christ knows 'what is
inside a person'. Only he knows! Today too often people do not know what they carry inside, in the
deepest recesses of their soul, in their heart. Too often people are uncertain about a sense of life
on earth. Invaded by doubts they are led into despair. Therefore-with humility and trust I beg and
implore you-allow Christ to speak to the person in you. Only he has the words of life, yes, eternal
life".
Opening wide the doors to Christ, accepting him into humanity itself poses absolutely no threat to
persons, indeed it is the only road to take to arrive at the total truth and the exalted value of the
human individual.
This vital synthesis will be achieved when the lay faithful know how to put the gospel and their
daily duties of life into a most shining and convincing testimony, where, not fear but the loving
pursuit of Christ and adherence to him will be the factors determining how a person is to live and
grow, and these will lead to new ways of living more in conformity with human dignity.
Humanity is loved by God! This very simple yet profound proclamation is owed to humanity by the
Church. Each Christian's words and life must make this proclamation resound: God loves you,
Christ came for you, Christ is for you "the Way, the Truth and the Life!".
This re-evangelization is directed not only to individual persons but also to entire portions of
populations in the variety of their situations, surroundings and cultures. Its purpose is the formation
of mature ecclesial communities, in which the faith might radiate and l the basic meaning of
adherence to the person of Christ and his Gospel, of an encounter and sacramental communion
with him, and of an existence lived in charity and in service.
The lay faithful have their part to l in the formation of these ecclesial communities, not only
through an active and responsible participation in the life of the community, in other words,
through a testimony that only they can give, but also through a missionary zeal and activity
towards the many people who still do not believe and who no longer live the faith received at
Baptism.
In the case of coming generations, the lay faithful must offer the very valuable contribution, more
necessary than ever, of a systematic work in catechesis. The Synod Fathers have gratefully taken
note of the work of catechists, acknowledging that they "have a task that carries great importance
in animating ecclesial communities". It goes without saying that Christian parents are the
primary and irreplaceable catechists of their children, a task for which they are given the grace by
the Sacrament of Matrimony. At the same time, however, we all ought to be aware of the "rights"
that each baptized person has to being instructed, educated and supported in the faith and the
Christian life.
Go Into the Whole World
While pointing out and experiencing the present urgency for a re-evangelization, the Church
cannot withdraw from her ongoing mission of bringing the gospel to the multitudes -the millions
and millions of men and women-who as yet do not know Christ the Redeemer of humanity. In a
specific way this is the missionary work that Jesus entrusted and again entrusts each day to his
Church.
The activity of the lay faithful, who are always present in these surroundings, is revealed in these
days as increasingly necessary and valuable. As it stands, the command of the Lord "Go into the
whole world" is continuing to find a generous response from laypersons who are ready to leave
familiar surroundings, their work, their region or country, at least for a determined time, to go into
mission territory. Even Christian married couples, in imitation of Aquila and Priscilla,
are offering a comforting testimony of impassioned love for Christ and the Church
through their valuable presence in mission lands. A true missionary presence is exercised even by
those who for various reasons live in countries or surroundings where the Church is not yet
established and bear witness to the faith.
However, at present the missionary concern is taking on such extensive and serious proportions
for the Church that only a truly consolidated effort to assume responsibility by all members of the
Church, both individuals and communities, can lead to the hope for a more fruitful response.
The invitation addressed by the Second Vatican Council to the particular Church retains all its
value, even demanding at present a more extensive and more decisive acceptance: "Since the
particular Churches are bound to mirror the universal Church as perfectly as possible, let them be
fully aware that they have been sent also to those who do not believe in Christ".
The Church today ought to take a giant step forward in her evangelization effort, and enter into a
new stage of history in her missionary dynamism. In a world where the lessening of distance
makes the world increasingly smaller, the Church community ought to strengthen the bonds
among its members, exchange vital energies and means, and commit itself as a group to a unique
and common mission of proclaiming and living the Gospel. "So-called younger Churches have
need of the strength of the older Churches and the older ones need the witness and impulse of the
younger, so that individual Churches receive the riches of other Churches".
In this area, younger Churches are finding that an essential and undeniable element in the
founding of Churches is the formation not only of local clergy but also of a mature and
responsible lay faithful: in this way the community which itself has been evangelized goes forth
into a new region of the world so that it too might respond to the mission of proclaiming and
bearing witness to the Gospel of Christ.
The Synod Fathers have mentioned that the lay faithful can favor the relations which ought to be
established with followers of various religions through their example in the situations in which they
live and in their activities: "Throughout the world today the Church lives among people of various
religions... All the Faithful, especially the lay faithful who live among the people of other religions,
whether living in their native region or in lands as migrants, ought to be for all a sign of the Lord
and his Church, in a way adapted to the actual living situation of each place. Dialogue among
religions has a preeminent part, for it leads to love and mutual respect, and takes away, or at least
diminishes, prejudices among the followers of various religions and promotes unity and friendship
among peoples".
What is first needed for the evangelization of the world are those who will evangelize. In this
regard everyone, beginning with the Christian family, must feel the responsibility to foster the birth
and growth of vocations, both priestly and religious as well as in the lay state, specifically directed
to the missions. This should be done by relying on every appropriate means, but without ever
neglecting the privileged means of prayer, according to the very words of the Lord Jesus: "The
harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few; pray therefore the Lord of the harvest to send out
laborers into his harvest!".
To Live the Gospel Serving the Person and Society
In both accepting and proclaiming the Gospel in the power of the Spirit the Church becomes at
one and the same time an "evangelizing and evangelized" community, and for this very reason
she is made the servant of all. In her the lay faithful participate in the mission of service to the
person and society. Without doubt the Church has the Kingdom of God as her supreme goal, of
which "she on earth is its seed and beginning", and is therefore totally consecrated to the
glorification of the Father. However, the Kingdom is the source of full liberation and total salvation
for all people: with this in mind, then, the Church walks and lives, intimately bound in a real sense
to their history.
Having received the responsibility of manifesting to the world the mystery of God that shines forth
in Jesus Christ, the Church likewise awakens one person to another, giving a sense of one's
existence, opening each to the whole truth about the individual and of each person's final
destiny. From this perspective the Church is called, in virtue of her very mission of
evangelization, to serve all humanity. Such service is rooted primarily in the extraordinary and
profound fact that "through the Incarnation the Son of God has united himself in some fashion to
every person".
For this reason the person "is the primary route that the Church must travel in ling her mission:
the individual is the primary and fundamental way for the Church, the way traced out by Christ
himself, the way that leads in variably through the mystery of the Incarnation and
Redemption".
The Second Vatican Council, repeatedly and with a singular clarity and force, expressed these
very sentiments in its documents. We again read a particularly enlightening text from the
Constitution Gaudium et Spes: "Pursuing the saving purpose which is proper to her, the Church not
only communicates divine life to all, but in some way casts the reflected light of that divine life over
the entire earth. She does this most of all by her healing and elevating impact on the dignity of the
human person, by the way in which she strengthens the bonds of human society, and imbues the
daily activity of people with a deeper sense and meaning. Thus, through her individual members
and the whole community, the Church believes she cn contribute much to make the family of
man and its history more human".
In this work of contributing to the human family, for which the whole Church is responsible, a
particular place falls to the lay faithful, by reason of their "secular character", obliging them, in their
proper and irreplaceable way, to work towards the Christian animation of the temporal order.
Promoting the Dignity of the Person
To rediscover and make others rediscover the inviolable dignity of every human person makes
up an essential task, in a certain sense, the central and unifying task of the service which the
Church, and the lay faithful in her, are called to render to the human family.
Among all other earthly beings, only a man or a woman is a "person", a conscious and free being
and, precisely for this reason, the "center and summit" of all that exists on the earth.
The dignity of the person is the most precious possession of an individual. As a result, the value of
one person transcends all the material world. The words of Jesus, "For what does it profit a man,
to gain the whole world and to forfeit his life?"  contain an enlightening and stirring
statement about the individual: value comes not from what a person "has" even if the person
possessed the whole world!-as much as from what a person "is": the goods of the world do not
count as much as the good of the person, the good which is the person individually.
The dignity of the person is manifested in all its radiance when the person's origin and destiny are
considered: created by God in his image and likeness as well as redeemed by the most precious
blood of Christ, the person is called to be a "child in the Son" and a living temple of the Spirit,
destined for the eternal life of blessed communion with God. For this reason every violation of the
personal dignity of the human being cries out in vengeance to God and is an offence against the
Creator of the individual.
In virtue of a personal dignity the human being is always a value as an individual, and as such
demands being considered and treated as a person and never, on the contrary, considered and
treated as an object to be used, or as a means, or as a thing.
The dignity of the person constitutes the foundation of the equality of all people among
themselves. As a result all forms of discrimination are totally unacceptable, especially those forms
which unfortunately continue to divide and degrade the human family, from those based on race or
economics to those social and cultural, from political to geographic, etc. Each discrimination
constitutes an absolutely intolerable injustice, not so much for the tensions and the conflicts that
can be generated in the social sphere, as much as for the dishonor inflicted on the dignity of the
person: not only to the dignity of the individual who is the victim of the injustice, but still more to the
one who commits the injustice.
Just as personal dignity is the foundation of equality of all people among themselves, so it is also
the foundation of participation and solidarity of all people among themselves: dialogue and
communion are rooted ultimately in what people "are", first and foremost, rather than on what
people "have".
The dignity of the person is the indestructible property of every human being. The force of this
affirmation is based on the uniqueness and irrepeatibility of every person. From it flows that the
individual can never be reduced by all that seeks to crush and to annihilate the person into the
anonymity that comes from collectivity, institutions, structures and systems. As an individual, a
person is not a number or simply a link in a chain, nor even less, an impersonal element in some
system. The most radical and elevating affirmation of the value of every human being was made
by the Son of God in his becoming man in the womb of a woman, as we continue to be reminded
each Christmas.
Respecting the Inviolable Right to Life
In effect the acknowledgment of the personal dignity of every human being demands the
respect, the defense and the promotion of therights of the human person. It is a question of
inherent, universal and inviolable rights. No one, no individual, no group, no authority, no State,
can change-let alone eliminate-them because such rights find their source in God himself.
The inviolability of the person which is a reflection of the absolute inviolability of God, fnds its
primary and fundamental expression in the inviolability of human life. Above all, the common
outcry, which is justly made on behalf of human rights-for example, the right to health, to home, to
work, to family, to culture- is false and illusory if the right to life, the most basic and fundamental
right and the condition for all other personal rights, is not defended with maximum determination.
The Church has never yielded in the face of all the violations that the right to life of every human
being has received, and continues to receive, both from individuals and from those in authority.
The human being is entitled to such rights, in every phase of development, from conception until
natural death; and in every condition, whether healthy or sick, whole or handicapped, rich or poor.
The Second Vatican Council openly proclaimed: "All offences against life itself, such as every kind
of murder, genocide, abortion, euthanasia and willful suicide; all violations of the integrity of the
human person, such as mutilation, physical and mental torture, undue psychological pressures; all
offences against human dignity, such as subhuman living conditions, arbitrary imprisonment,
deportation, slavery, prostitution, the selling of women and children, degrading working conditions
where men are treated as mere tools for profit rather than free and responsible persons; all these
and the like are certainly criminal: they poison human society; and they do more harm to those
who practice them than those who suffer from the injury. Moreover, they are a supreme dishonor
to the Creator".
If, indeed, everyone has the mission and responsibility of acknowledging the personal dignity of
every human being and of defending the right to life, some lay faithful are given a particular title to
this task: such as parents, teachers, healthworkers and the many who hold economic and political
power.
The Church today lives a fundamental aspect of her mission in lovingly and generously accepting
every human being, especially those who are weak and sick. This is made all the more necessary
as a "culture of death" threatens to take control. In fact, "the Church family believes that human
life, even if weak and suffering, is always a wonderful gift of God's goodness. Against the
pessimism and selfishness which casts a shadow over the world, the Church stands for life: in
each human life she sees the splendor of that 'Yes', that 'Amen', which is Christ himself
To the 'No' which assails and afflicts the world, she replies with this living 'Yes',
this defending of the human person and the world from all who plot against life". It is the
responsibility of the lay faithful, who more directly through their vocation or their profession are
involved in accepting life, to make the Church's "Yes" to human life concrete and efficacious.
The enormous development of biological and medical science, united to an amazing power in
technology, today provides possibilities on the very frontier of human life which imply new
responsibilities. In fact, today humanity is in the position not only of "observing" but even
"exercising a control over" human life at its very beginning and in its first stages of development.
The moral conscience of humanity is not able to turn aside or remain indifferent in the face of
these gigantic strides accomplished by a technology that is acquiring a continually more extensive
and profound dominion over the working processes that govern procreation and the first phases of
human life. Today as perhaps never before in history or in this field, wisdom shows itselt to be the
only firm basis to salvation, in that persons engaged in scientific research and in its application are
always to act with intelligence and love, that is, respecting, even remaining in veneration of, the
inviolable dignity of the personhood of every human being, from the first moment of life's
existence. This occurs when science and technology are committed with licit means to the defense
of life and the cure of disease in its beginnings, refusing on the contrary-even for the dignity of
research itself-to perform operations that result in falsifying the genetic patrimony of the individual
and of human generative power.
The lay faithful, having responsibility in various capacities and at different levels of science as well
as in the medical, social, legislative and economic fields must courageously accept the "challenge"
posed by new problems in bioethics. The Synod Fathers used these words: "Christians ought to
exercise their responsibilities as masters of science and technology, and not become their slaves... In view of the moral challenges presented by enormous new technological power, endangering
not only fundamental human rights but the very biological essence of the human species, it is of
utmost importance that lay Christians with the help of the universal Church-take up the task of
calling culture back to the principles of an authentic humanism, giving a dynamic and sure
foundation to the promotion and defense of the rights of the human being in one's very essence,
an essence which the preaching of the Gospel reveals to all.
Today maximum vigilance must be exercised by everyone in the face of the phenomenon of the
concentration of power and technology. In fact such a concentration has a tendency to manipulate
not only the biological essence but the very content of people's consciences and life styles,
thereby worsening the condition of entire peoples by discrimination and marginization.
Free to Call Upon the Name of the Lord
3Respect for the dignity of the person, which implies the defense and promotion of human
rights, demands the recognition of the religious dimension of the individual. This is not simply a
requirement "concerning matters of faith", but a requirement that finds itself inextricably bound up
with the very reality of the individual. In fact, the individual's relation to God is a constitutive
element of the very "being" and "existence" of an individual: it is in God that we "live, move and
have our being". Even if not all believe this truth, the many who are convinced of it
have the right to be respected for their faith and for their life-choice, individual and communal, that
flows from that faith. This is the right of freedom of conscience and religious freedom, the effective
acknowledgment of which is among the highest goods and the most serious duties of every people
that truly wishes to assure the good of the person and society. "Religious freedom, an essential
requirement of the dignity of every person, is a cornerstone of the structure of human rights, and
for this reason an irreplaceable factor in the good of individuals and of the whole of society, as well
as of the personal fulfillment of each individual. It follows that the freedom of individuals and of
communities to profess and practice their religion is an essential element for peaceful human
coexistence... The civil and social right to religious freedom, inasmuch as it touches the most
intimate sphere of the spirit, is a point of reference for the other fundamental rights and in some
way becomes a measure of them".
The Synod did not forget the many brothers and sisters that still do not enjoy such a right and
have to face difficulties, marginization, suffering, persecution, and oftentimes death because of
professing the faith. For the most part, they are brothers and sisters of the Christian lay faithful.
The proclamation of the Gospel and the Christian testimony given in a life of suffering and
martyrdom make up the summit of the apostolic life among Christ's disciples, just as the love for
the Lord Jesus even to the giving of one's life constitutes a source of extraordinary fruitfulness for
the building up of the Church. Thus the mystic vine bears witness to its earnestness in the faith, as
expressed by Saint Augustine: "But that vine, as predicted by the prophets and even by the Lord
himself, spread its fruitful branches in the world, and becomes the more fruitful the more it is
watered by the blood of martyrs".
The whole Church is profoundly grateful for this example and this gift. These sons and daughters
give reason for renewing the pursuit of a holy and apostolic life. In this sense the Fathers at the
Synod have made it their special duty "to give thanks to those lay people who, despite their
restricted liberty, live as tireless witnesses of faith in faithful union with the Apostolic See, although
they may be deprived of sacred ministers. They risk everything, even life. In this way the lay
faithful bear witness to an essential property of the Church: God's Church is born of God's grace,
which is expressed in an excellent way in martyrdom".
Without doubt, all that has been said until now on the subject of respect for personal dignity and
the acknowledgment of human rights concerns the responsibility of each Christian, of each
person. However, we must immediately recognize how such a problem today has a world
dimension: in fact, it is a question which at this moment affects entire groups, indeed entire
peoples, who are violently being denied their basic rights. Those forms of unequal development
among the so-called different "Worlds" were openly denounced in the recent Encyclical Sollicitudo
Rei Socialis.
Respect for the human person goes beyond the demands of individual morality. Instead, it is a
basic criterion, an essential element, in the very structure of society, since the purpose of the
whole of socety itself is geared to the human person.
Thus, intimately connected with the responsibility of service to the person, is the responsibility to
serve society, as the general task of that Christian animation of the temporal order to which the lay
faithful are called as their proper and specific role.
The Family: Where the Duty to Society Begins
The human person has an inherent social dimension which calls a person from the innermost
depths of self to communion with others and to the giving of self to others: "God, who has fatherly
concern for everyone has willed that all people should form one family and treat one another in a
spirit of brotherhood". Thus society as a fruit and sign of the social nature of the individual
reveals its whole truth in being a community of persons.
Thus the result is an interdependence and reciprocity between the person and society: all that is
accomplished in favor of the person is also a service rendered to society, and all that is done in
favor of society redounds to the benefit of the person. For this reason the duty of the lay faithful in
the apostolate of the temporal order is always to be viewed both from its meaning of service to the
person founded on the individual's uniqueness and irrepeatibility as well as on the meaning of
service to all people which is inseparable from it.
The first and basic expression of the social dimension of the person, then, is the married couple
and the family: "But God did not create man a solitary being. From the beginning 'male and female
he created them'. This partnership of man and woman constitutes the first form of
communion between persons". Jesus is concerned to restore integral dignity to the married
couple and solidity to the family.Saint Paul shows the deep rapport between marriage
and the mystery of Christ and the Church.
The lay faithful's duty to society primarily begins in marriage and in the family. This duty can only
be led adequately with the conviction of the unique and irreplaceable value that the family has
in the development of society and the Church herself.
The family is the basic cell of society. It is the cradle of life and love, the place in which the
individual "is born" and "grows". Therefore a primary concern is reserved for this community,
especially, in those times when human egoism, the anti-birth campaign, totalitarian politics,
situations of poverty, material, cultural and moral misery, threaten to make these very springs of
life dry up. Furthermore, ideologies and various systems, together with forms of uninterest and
indifference, dare to take over the role in education proper to the family.
Required in the face of this is a vast, extensive and systematic work, sustained not only by culture
but also by economic and legislative means, which will safeguard the role of family in its task of
being the primary place of "humanization" for the person and society.
It is above all the lay faithful's duty in the apostolate to make the family aware of its identity as the
primary social nucleus, and its basic role in society, so that it might itself become always a more
active and responsible place for proper growth and proper participation in social life. In such a way
the family can and must require from all, beginning with public authority, the respect for those
rights which in saving the family, will save society itself.
All that is written in the Exhortation Familiaris Consortio about participation in the development of
society and all that the Holy See, at the invitation of the 1980 Synod of Bishops, has
formulated with the "Charter of Rights for the Family", represent a complete and coordinated
working program for all those members of the lay faithful who, in various capacities, are
interested in the values and the needs of the family. Such a program needs to be more
opportunely and decisively realized as the threats to the stability and fruitfulness of the family
become more serious and the attempt to reduce the value of the family and to lessen its social
value become more pressing and coordinated.
As experience testifies, whole civilizations and the cohesiveness of peoples depend above all on
the human quality of their families. For this reason the duty in the apostolate towards the family
acquires an incomparable social value. The Church, for her part, is deeply convinced of it, knowing
well that "the path to the future passes through the family".
Charity: The Soul and Sustenance of Solidarity
4Service to society is expressed and realized in the most diverse ways, from those
spontaneous and informal to those more structured, from help given to individuals to those
destined for various groups and communities of persons.
The whole Church as such, is directly called to the service of charity: "In the very early days the
Church added the agape to the Eucharistic Supper, and thus showed herself to be wholly united
around Christ by the bond of charity. So too, in all ages, she is recognized by this sign of love, and
while she rejoices in the undertakings of others, she claims works of charity as her own inalienable
duty and right. For this reason, mercy to the poor and the sick, works of charity and mutual aid
intended to relieve human needs of every kind, are held in special honor in the Church".
Charity towards one's neighbor, through contemporary forms of the traditional spiritual and
corporal works of mercy, represent the most immediate, ordinary and habitual ways that lead to
the Christian animation of the temporal order, the specific duty of the lay faithful.
Through charity towards one's neighbor, the lay faithful exercise and manifest their participation in
the kingship of Christ, that is, in the power of the Son of man who "came not to be served but to
serve". They live and manifest such a kingship in a most simple yet exalted manner,
possible for everyone at all times because charity is the highest gift offered by the Spirit for
building up the Church  and for the good of humanity. In fact, charity gives life and
sustains the works of solidarity that look to the total needs of the human being.
The same charity, realized not only by individuals but also in a joint way by groups and
communities, is and will always be necessary. Nothing and no one will be able to substitute for it,
not even the multiplicity of institutions and public initiatives forced to give a response to the needsoftentimes today so serious and widespread-of entire populations. Paradoxically such charity is
made increasingly necessary the more that institutions become complex in their organization and
pretend to manage every area at hand. In the end such projects lose their effectiveness as a result
of an impersonal functionalism, an overgrown bureaucracy, unjust private interests and an all-tooeasy and generalized disengagement from a sense of duty.
Precisely in this context various forms of volunteer work which express themselves in a multiplicity
of services and activities continue to come about and to spread, particularly in organized society. If
this impartial service be truly given for the good of all persons, especially the most in need and
forgotten by the social services of society itself, then, volunteer work can be considered an
important expression of the apostolate, in which lay men and women have a primary role.
Public Life: for Everyone and by Everyone
4A charity that loves and serves the person is never able to be separated from justice. Each in
its own way demands the full, effective acknowledgment of the rights of the individual, to which
society is ordered in all its structures and institutions.
In order to achieve their task directed to the Christian animation of the temporal order, in the sense
of serving persons and society, the lay faithful are never to relinquish their participation in "public
life", that is, in the many different economic, social, legislative, administrative and cultural areas,
which are intended to promote organically and institutionally the common good. The Synod
Fathers have repeatedly affirmed that every person has a right and duty to participate in public life,
albeit in a diversity and complementarity of forms, levels, tasks and responsibilities. Charges of
careerism, idolatry of power, egoism and corruption that are oftentimes directed at persons in
government, parliaments, the ruling classes, or political parties, as well as the common opinion
that participating in politics is an absolute moral danger, does not in the least justify either
skepticism or an absence on the part of Christians in public life.
On the contrary, the Second Vatican Council's words are particularly significant: "The Ckurch
regards as worthy of praise and consideration the work of those who, as a service to others,
dedicate themselves to the public good of the state and undertake the burdens of this task".
Public life on behalf of the person and society finds its basic standard in the pursuit of the common
good, as the good of everyone and as the good of each person taken as a whole, which is
guaranteed and offered in a fitting manner to people, both as individuals and in groups, for their
free and responsible acceptance. "The political community"-we read in the Constitution Gaudium et
Spes-"exists for that common good in which the community finds its full justification and meaning,
and from which it derives its basic, proper and lawful arrangement. The common good embraces
the sum total of all those conditions of social life by which individuals, families, and organizations
can achieve more thoroughly their own fulfillment". Furthermore, public life on behalf of the
person and society finds its continuous line of action in the defense and the promotion of justice,
understood to be a "virtue", an understanding which requires education, as well as a moral "force"
that sustains the obligation to foster the rights and duties of each and everyone, based on the
personal dignity of each human being.
The spirit of service is a fundamental element in the exercise of political power. This spirit of
service, together with the necessary competence and efficiency, can make "virtuous" or "above
criticism" the activity of persons in public life which is justly demanded by the rest of the people. To
accomplish this requires a fullscale battle and a determination to overcome every temptation, such
as the recourse to disloyalty and to falsehood, the waste of public funds for the advantage of a few
and those with special interests, and the use of ambiguous and illicit means for acquiring,
maintaining and increasing power at any cost.
The lay faithful given a charge in public life certainly ought to respect the autonomy of earthly
realities properly understood, as we read in the Constitution Gaudium et spes: "It is of great
importance, especially in a pluralistic society, to work out a proper vision of the relationship
between the political community and the Church, and to distinguish clearly between the activities
of Christians, acting individually or collectively, in their own name as citizens guided by the
dictates of a Christian conscience, and their activity in communion with their Pastors in the name
of the Church. The Church by reason of her role and competence, is not identified with any
political community nor bound by ties to any political system. She is at once the sign and the
safeguard of the transcendental dimension of the human person".At the same time-and this is
felt today as a pressing responsibility-the lay faithful must bear witness to those human and gospel
values that are intimately connected with political activity itself, such as liberty and justice,
solidarity, faithful and unselfish dedication for the good of all, a simple life-style, and a preferential
love for the poor and the least. This demands that the lay faithful always be more animated by a
real participation in the life of the Church and enlightened by her social doctrine. In this they can
be supported and helped by the nearness of the Christian community and their Pastors.
The manner and means for achieving a public life which has true human development as its goal
is solidarity. This concerns the active and responsible participation of all in public life, from
individual citizens to various groups, from labor unions to political parties. All of us, each and
everyone, are the goal of public life as well as its leading participants. In this environment, as I
wrote in the Encyclical Sollicitudo rei socialis, solidarity "is not a feeling of vague compassion or
shallow distress at the misfortunes of so many people, both near and far. On the contrary, it is a
firm and persevering determination to commit oneself to the common good, that is to say, to the
good of all and of each individual because we are all really responsible for all".
Today political solidarity requires going beyond single nations or a single block of nations, to a
consideration on a properly continental and world level.
The fruit of sound political activity, which is so much desired by everyone but always lacking in
advancement, is peace. The lay faithful cannot remain indifferent or be strangers and inactive in
the face of all that denies and compromises peace, namely, violence and war, torture and
terrorism, concentration camps, militarization of public life, the arms race, and the nuclear threat.
On the contrary, as disciples of Jesus Christ, "Prince of Peace"  and "Our Peace", the lay faithful ought to take upon themselves the task of being "peacemakers",
both through a conversion of "heart", justice and charity, all of which are the undeniable foundation
of peace.
The lay faithful in working together with all those that truly seek peace and themselves serving in
specific organizations as well as national and international institutions, ought to promote an
extensive work of education intended to defeat the ruling culture of egoism, hate, the vendetta and
hostility, and thereby to develop the culture of solidarity at every level. Such solidarity, in fact, "is
the way to peace and at the same time to development". From this perspective the Synod
Fathers have invited Christians to reject as unacceptable all forms of violence, to promote
attitudes of dialogue and peace and to commit themselves to establish a just international and
social order.
Placing the Individual at the Center of Socio-Economic Life
4Service to society on the part of the lay faithful finds its essence in the socio-economic
question, which depends on the organization of work.
Recently recalled in the Encyclical Sollicitudo Rei Socialis, is the seriousness of present problems
as they relate to the subject of development and a proposed solution according to the social
doctrine of the Church. I warmly desire to again refer its contents to all, in particular, to the lay
faithful.
The basis for the social doctrine of the Church is the principle of the universal destination of
goods. According to the plan of God the goods of the earth are offered to all people and to each
individual as a means towards the development of a truly human life. At the service of this
destination of goods is private property, which -precisely for this purpose-possesses an intrinsic
social function. Concretely the work of man and woman represents the most common and most
immediate instrument for the development of economic life, an instrument that constitutes at one
and the same time a right and a duty for every individual.
Once again, all of this comes to mind in a particular way in the mission of the lay faithful. The
Second Vatican Council formulates in general terms the purpose and criterion of their presence
and their action: "In the socio-economic realm the dignity and total vocation of the human person
must be honored and advanced along with the welfare of society as a whole, for man is the
source, the center, and the purpose of all socio-economic life".
In the context of the tranformations taking place in the world of economy and work which are a
cause of concern, the lay faithful have the responsibility of being in the forefront in working out a
solution to the very serious problems of growing unemployment; to fight for the most opportune
overcoming of numerous injustices that come from organizations of work which lack a proper goal;
to make the workplace become a community of persons respected in their uniqueness and in their
right to participation; to develop new solidarity among those that participate in a common work; to
raise up new forms of entrepreneurship and to look again at systems of commerce, finance and
exchange of technology.
To such an end the lay faithful must accomplish their work with professional competence, with
human honesty, and with a Christian spirit, and especially as a way of their own
sanctification, according to the explicit invitation of the Council: "By work an individual
ordinarily provides for self and family, is joined in fellowship to others, and renders them service;
and is enabled to exercise genuine charity and be a partner in the work of bringing divine creation
to perfection. Moreover, we know that through work offered to God an individual is associated with
the redemptive work of Jesus Christ, whose labor with his hands at Nazareth greatly ennobled
the dignity of work".
Today in an ever-increasingly acute way, the so-called "ecological" question poses itself in relation
to socio-economic life and work Certainly humanity has received from God himself the task of
"dominating" the created world and "cultivating the garden" of the world. But this is a task that
humanity must carry out in respect for the divine image received, and, therefore, with intelligence
and with love, assuming responsibility for the gifts that God has bestowed and continues to
bestow. Humanity has in its possession a gift that must be passed on to future generations, if
possible, passed on in better condition. Even these future generations are the recipients of the
Lord's gifts: "The dominion granted to humanity by the Creator is not an absolute power, nor can
one speak of a freedom to 'use and misuse', or to dispose of things as one pleases. The limitation
imposed from the beginning by the Creator himself and expressed symbolically by the prohibition
not to 'eat of the fruit of the tree'  shows clearly enough that, when it comes to the
natural world, we are subject not only to biological laws but also to moral ones, which cannot be
violated with impunity. A true concept of development cannot ignore the use of the things of
nature, the renewability of resources and the consequences of haphazard industrialization-three
considerations which alert our consciences to the moral dimension of development".
Evangelizing Culture and the Cultures of Humanity
4Service to the individual and to human society is expressed and finds its fulfillment through the
creation and the transmission of culture, which especially in our time constitutes one of the more
serious tasks of living together as a human family and of social evolution. In light of the Council,
we mean by "culture" all those "factors which go to the refining and developing of humanity's
diverse spiritual and physical endowments. It means the efforts of the human family to bring the
world under its control through its knowledge and its labor; to humanize social life both in the
family and in the whole civic community through the improvement of customs and institutions; to
express through its works the great spiritual experiences and aspirations of all peoples throughout
the ages; finally, to communicate and to preserve them to be an inspiration for the progress of
many, indeed of the whole human race". In this sense, culture must be held as the common
good of every people, the expression of its dignity, liberty and creativity, and the testimony of its
course through history. In particular, only from within and through culture does the Christian faith
become a part of history and the creator of history.
The Church is fully aware of a pastoral urgency that calls for an absolutely special concern for
culture in those circumstances where the development of a culture becomes disassociated not
only from Christian faith but even from human values, as well as in those situations where
science and technology are powerless in giving an adequate response to the pressing questions
of truth and well-being that burn in people's hearts. For this reason the Church calls upon the lay
faithful to be present, as signs of courage and intellectual creativity, in the privileged places of
culture, that is, the world of education-school and university-in places of scientific and
technological research, the areas of artistic creativity and work in the humanities. Such a presence
is destined not only for the recognition and possible purification of the elements that critically
burden existing culture, but also for the elevation of these cultures through the riches which have
their source in the Gospel and the Christian faith. The extensive treatment by the Second Vatican
Council of the rapport between the Gospel and culture represents a constant historic fact and at
the same time serves as a working ideal of particular and immediate urgency. It is a challenging
program given as a pastoral responsibility to the entire Church, but in a specific way to the lay
faithful in her. "The good news of Christ continually renews the life and culture of fallen humanity; it
combats and removes the error and evil which flow from the attraction of sin which are a perpetual
threat. She never ceases to purify and to elevate the morality of peoples... In this way the Church
carries out her mission and in that very act she stimulates and makes her contribution to human
and civic culture. By her action, even in its liturgical forms, she leads people to interior
freedom".
Some particularly significant citations from Paul VI's Exhortation Evangelii Nuntiandi merit
recollection here: "The Church evangelizes when she seeks to convert, solely through the divine
power of the message she proclaims, both the personal and
collective consciences of people, the activities in which they engage, and the lives and concrete
milieux which are theirs. Strata of humanity are transformed: for the Church it is a question not
only of preaching the Gospel in ever-wider geographic areas or to ever-greater numbers of people,
but also of affecting and as it were challenging, through the power of the Gospel, mankind's
criteria of judgment, determining values, points of interest, lines of thought, sources of inspiration
and models of life, which are in contrast with the Word of God and the plan of salvation. All this
could be expressed in the following words: What matters is to evangelizehumanity's culture and
the cultures of the human family... the split between the Gospel and culture is without a doubt the
drama of our time, just as it was of other times. Therefore, every effort must be made to ensure a
full evangelization of culture, or more correctly of cultures".
The privileged way at present for the creation and transmission of culture is the means of social
communications. The world of the massmedia represents a new frontier for the mission of the
Church, because it is undergoing a rapid and innovative development and has an extensive
worldwide influence on the formation of mentality and customs. In particular, the lay faithful's
responsibility as professionals in this field, exercised both by individual right and through
community initiatives and institutions, demands a recognition of all its values, and demands that it
be sustained by more adequate resource materials, both intellectual and pastoral.
The use of these instruments by professionals in communication and their reception by the public
demand both a work of education in a critical sense, which is animated by a passion for the truth,
and a work of defense of liberty, respect for the dignity of individuals, and the elevation of the
authentic culture of peoples which occurs through a firm and courageous rejection of every form of
monopoly and manipulation.
However, the pastoral responsibility among the lay faithful does not stop with this work of defense.
It extends to everyone in the world of communications, even to those professional people of the
press, cinema, radio, television and theatre. These also are called to proclaim the gospel that
brings salvation.
V
LABOURERS IN THE LORD'S VINEYARD
Good Stewards of God's Varied Grace
The Variety of Vocations
According to the gospel parable, the "householder" calls the laborers for his vineyard at
various times during the day: some at dawn, others about nine in the morning, still others about
midday and at three, the last, around five. In commenting on these words of the
gospel, Saint Gregory the Great makes a comparison between the various times of the call and
the different stages in life: "It is possible to compare the different hours", he writes, "to the various
stages in a person's life. According to our analogy the morning can certainly represent childhood.
The third hour, then, can refer to adolescence; the sun has now moved to the height of heaven,
that is, at this stage a person grows in strength. The sixth hour is adulthood, the sun is in the
middle of the sky, indeed at this age the fullness of vitality is obvious. Old age represents the ninth
hour, because the sun starts its descent from the height of heaven, thus the youthful vitality begins
to decline. The eleventh hour represents those who are most advanced in years... The laborers,
then, are called and sent forth into the vineyard at different hours, that is to say, one is led to a
holy life during childhood, another in adolescence, another in adulthood and another in old
age".
We can make a further application of the comments of Saint Gregory the Great to the
extraordinary variety of ways the Church becomes "present" in life; one and all are called to work
for the coming of the Kingdom of God according to the diversity of callings and situations,
charisms and ministries. This variety is not only linked to age, but also to the difference of sex and
to the diversity of natural gifts, as well as to careers and conditions affecting a person's life. It is a
variety that makes the riches of the Church more vital and concrete.
Young People, Children and Older People
Youth, the Hope of the Church
The Synod wished to give particular attention to the young. And rightly so. In a great many
countries of the world, they represent half of entire populations, and often constitute in number half
of the People of God itself living in those countries. Simply from this aspect youth make up an
exceptional potential and a great challenge for the future of the Church. In fact the Church sees
her path towards the future in the youth, beholding in them a reflection of herself and her call to
that blessed youthfulness which she constantly enjoys as a result of Christ's Spirit. In this sense
the Council has defined youth as "the hope of the Church".
In the letter of 31 March 1985 to young men and women in the world we read: "The Church looks
to the youth, indeed the Church in a special way looks at herself in the youth, in all of you and in
each of you. It has been so from the beginning, from apostolic times. The words of Saint. John in his
First Letter can serve as special testimony: 'I am writing to you, young people, because you have
overcome the evil one. I write to you, children, because you know the Father... I write to you,
young people, because you are strong and the word of God abides in you... In our
generation, at the end of the Second Millennium after Christ, the Church also sees herself in the
youth".
Youth must not simply be considered as an object of pastoral concern for the Church: in fact,
young people are and ought to be encouraged to be active on behalf of the Church as leading
characters in evangelization and participants in the renewal of society.. Youth is a time of an
especially intensive discovery of a "self" and "a choice of life". It is a time for growth which ought to
progress "in wisdom, age and grace before God and people".
The Synod Fathers have commented: "The sensitivity of young people profoundly affects their
perceiving of the values of justice, nonviolence and peace. Their hearts are disposed to fellowship,
friendship and solidarity. They are greatly moved by causes that relate to the quality of life and the
conservation of nature. But they are troubled by anxiety, deceptions, anguishes and fears of the
world as well as by the temptations that come with their state".
The Church must seek to rekindle the very special love displayed by Christ towards the young
man in the Gospel: "Jesus, looking upon him, loved him". For this reason the Church
does not tire of proclaiming Jesus Christ, of proclaiming his Gospel as the unique and satisfying
response to the most deep-seated aspirations of young people, as illustrated in Christ's forceful
and exalted personal call to discipleship ("Come and follow me."), that brings about a
sharing in the filial love of Jesus for his Father and the participation in his mission for the salvation
of humanity.
The Church has so much to talk about with youth, and youth have so much to share with the
Church. This mutual dialogue, by taking place with great cordiality, clarity and courage, will provide
a favorable setting for the meeting and exchange between generations, and will be a source of
richness and youthfulness for the Church and civil society. In its message to young people the
Council said: "The Church looks to you with confidence and with love... She is the real
youthfulness of the world... Look upon the Church and you will find in her the face of Christ".
Children and the Kingdom of Heaven
Children are certainly the object of the Lord Jesus' tender and generous love. To them he gave
his blessing, and, even more, to them he promised the Kingdom of heaven. In particular Jesus exalted the active
role that little ones have in the Kingdom of God. They
are the eloquent symbol and exalted image of those moral and spiritual conditions that are
essential for entering into the Kingdom of God and for living the logic of total confidence in the
Lord: "Truly I say to you, unless you turn and become like children. vou will never enter the
Kingdom of heaven. Whoever humbles himself like this child, he is the greatest in the Kingdom of
heaven".
Children are a continual reminder that the missionary fruitfulness of the Church has its life-giving
basis not in human means and merits, but in the absolute gratuitous gift of God. The life itself of
innocence and grace of many children, and even the suffering and oppression unjustly inflicted
upon them are in virtue of the Cross of Christ a source of spiritual enrichment for them and for the
entire Church. Everyone ought to be more conscious and grateful for this fact.
Furthermore, it must be acknowledged that valuable possibilities exist even in the life's stages of
infancy and childhood, both for the building up of the Church and for making society more
humane. How often the Council referred to the beneficial and constructive affects for the family,
"the domestic Church", through the presence of sons and daughters: "Children as living members
of the family, contribute in their in their own way to the sanctification of their parents". The
Council's words must also be repeated about children in relation to the local and universal Church.
John Gerson, a great theologian and educator of the 15th Century, had already emphasized this
fact in stating that "children and young people are in no way a negligible part of the Church".
Older People and the Gift of Wisdom
I now address older people, oftentimes unjustly considered as unproductive, if not directly an
insupportable burden. I remind older people that the Church calls and expects them to continue to
exercise their mission in the apostolic and missionary life. This is not only a possibility for them,
but it is their duty even in this time in their life when age itself provides opportunities in some
specific and basic way.
The Bible delights in presenting the older person as the symbol of someone rich in wisdom and
fear of the Lord. In this sense the "gift" of older people can be specifically that of
being the witness to tradition in the faith both in the Church and in society
the teacher of the lessons of life, and the worker of charity.
At this moment the growing number of older people in different countries worldwide and the
expected retirement of persons from various professions and the workplace provides older people
with a new opportunity in the apostolate. Involved in the task is their determination to overcome
the temptation of taking refuge in a nostalgia in a never-to-return past or fleeing from present
responsibility because of difficulties encountered in a world of one novelty after another. They
must always have a clear knowledge that one's role in the Church and society does not stop at a
certain age at all, but at such times knows only new ways of application. As the Psalmist says:
"They still bring forth fruit in old age, they are ever full of sap and green, to show that the Lord is
upright". I repeat all that I said during the celebration of the Older People's Jubilee:
"Arriving at an older age is to be considered a privilege: not simply because not everyone has the
good fortune to reach this stage in life, but also, and above all, because this period provides real
possibilities for better evaluating the past, for knowing and living more deeply the Paschal Mystery,
for becoming an example in the Church for the whole People of God... Despite the complex nature
of the problems you face: a strength that progressively diminishes, the insufficiencies of social
organizations, official legislation that comes late, or the lack of understanding by a self-centered
society, you are not to feel yourselves as persons underestimated in the life of the Church or as
passive objects in a fast-paced world, but as participants at a time of life which is humanly and
spiritually fruitful. You still have a mission to l, a contribution to make. According to the divine
plan, each individual human being lives a life of continual growth, from the beginning of existence
to the moment at which the last breath is taken".
Women and Men
4The Synod Fathers gave special attention to the status and role of women, with two purposes
in mind: to themselves acknowledge and to invite all others to once again acknowledge the
indispensable contribution of women to the building up of the Church and the development of
society. They wished as well to work on a more specific analysis of women's participation in the
life and mission of the Church.
Making reference to Pope John XXIII, who saw women's greater consciousness of their proper
dignity and their entrance into public life as signs of our times, the Synod Fathers, when
confronted with the various forms of discrimination and marginization to which women are
subjected simply because they are women, time and time again strongly affirmed the urgency to
defend and to promote the personal dignity of woman, and consequently, her equality with man.
If anyone has this task of advancing the dignity of women in the Church and society, it is women
themselves, who must recognize their responsibility as leading characters. There is still much
effort to be done, in many parts of the world and in various surroundings, to destroy that unjust
and deleterious mentality which considers the human being as a thing, as an object to buy and
sell, as an instrument for selfish interests or for pleasure only. Women themselves, for the most
part, are the prime victims of such a mentality. Only through openly acknowledging the personal
dignity of women is the first step taken to promote the full participation of women in Church life as
well as in social and public life. A more extensive and decisive response must be given to the
demands made in the Exhortation Familiaris Consortio concerning the many discriminations of
which women are the victims: "Vigorous and incisive pastoral action must be taken by all to
overcome completely these forms of discrimination so that the image of God that shines in all
human beings without exception may be fully respected". Along the same lines, the Synod
Fathers stated: "As an expression of her mission the Church must stand firmly against all forms of
discrimination and abuse of women". And again: "The dignity of women, gravely wounded in
public esteem, must be restored through effective respect for the rights of the human person and
by putting the teaching of the Church into practice"179].
In particular when speaking of active and responsible participation in the life and mission of the
Church, emphasis should be placed on what has already been stated and clearly urged by the
Second Vatican Council: "Since in our days women are taking an increasingly active share in the
whole life of society, it is very important that they participate more widely also in the various fields
of the Church's apostolate".
The awareness that women with their own gifts and tasks have their own specific vocation, has
increased and been deepened in the years following the Council and has found its fundamental
inspiration in the Gospel and the Church's history. In fact, for the believer the Gospel, namely, the
word and example of Jesus Christ, remains the necessary and decisive point of reference. In no
other moment in history is this fact more fruitful and innovative.
Though not called to the apostolate of the Twelve, and thereby, to the ministerial priesthood, many
women, nevertheless, accompanied Jesus in his ministry and assisted the group of Apostles, were present at the foot of the Cross, assisted at the burial of Christ  received and transmitted the message of resurrection on Easter morn, and
prayed with the apostles in the Cenacle awaiting Pentecost.
From the evidence of the Gospel, the Church at its origin detached herself from the culture of the
time and called women to tasks connected with spreading the gospel. In his letters the Apostle
Paul even cites by name a great number of women for their various functions in service of the
primitive Christian community.
"If the witness of the Apostles founds the Church", stated Paul VI, "the witness of women
contributes greatly towards nourishing the faith of Christian communities".
Both in her earliest days and in her successive development the Church, albeit in different ways
and with diverse emphases, has always known women who have exercised an oftentimes decisive
role in the Church herself and accomplished tasks of considerable value on her behalf. History is
marked by grand works, quite often lowly and hidden, but not for this reason any less decisive to
the growth and the holiness of the Church. It is necessary that this history continue, indeed that it
be expanded and intensified in the face of the growing and widespread awareness of the personal
dignity of woman and her vocation, particularly in light of the urgency of a "re-evangelization" and
a major effort towards "humanizing" social relations.
Gathering together the pronouncements of the Second Vatican Council, which reflect the Gospel's
message and the Church's history, the Synod Fathers formulated, among others, this precise
"recommendation": "It is necessary that the Church recognize all the gifts of men and women for
her life and mission, and put them into practice". And again, "This Synod proclaims that the
Church seeks the recognition and use of all the gifts, experiences and talents of men and women
to make her mission effective".
Anthropological and Theological Foundations
The condition that will assure the rightful presence of woman in the Church and in society is a
more penetrating and accurate consideration of the anthropological foundation for masculinity and
femininity with the intent of clarifying woman's personal identity in relation to man, that is, a
diversity yet mutual complementarity, not only as it concerns roles to be held and functions to be
performed, but also, and more deeply, as it concerns her make-up and meaning as a person.
The Synod Fathers have deeply felt this requirement, maintaining that "the anthropological and
theological foundations for resolving questions about the true significance and dignity of each sex
require deeper study".
Through committing herself to a reflection on the anthropological and theological basis of
femininity, the Church enters the historic process of the various movements for the promotion of
woman, and, in going to the very basic aspect of woman as a personal being, provides her most
precious contribution. But even before this the Church intends, in such a way, to obey God, who
created the individual "in his image", "male and female he created them"  and who
intended that they would accept the call of God to come to know, reverence and live his plan. It is
a plan that "from the beginning" has been indelibly imprinted in the very being of the human
person-men and women-and, therefore, in the make-up, meaning and deepest workings of the
individual. This most wise and loving plan must be explored to discover all its richness of content-a
richness that "from the beginning" came to be progressively manifested and realized in the whole
history of salvation, and was brought to completion in "the fullness of time", when "God sent his
Son, born of a woman". That "fullness" continues in history: God's plan for woman is read
and is to be read within the context of the faith of the Church, and also, in the lives lived by so
many Christian women today. Without forgetting the help that can come from different human
sciences and cultures, researchers because of an informed discernment, will be able to help
gather and clarify the values and requirements that belong to the enduring essential aspects of
women and those bound to evolve in history. The Second Vatican Council reminds us: "The
Church maintains that beneath all changes there are many realities which do not change; these
find their ultimate foundation in Christ, who is the same yesterday, and today, and forever ". The Apostolic Letter on the Dignity and Vocation of Woman gives much attention to
the anthropological and theological foundation of woman's dignity as a person. The document
seeks to again treat and develop the catechetical reflections of the Wednesday General
Audiences devoted over a long period of time to the "theology of the body", while at the same time
ling a promise made in the Encyclical Redemptoris Mater and serving as a response to
the request of the Synod Fathers.
May the reading of the Apostolic Letter Mulieris Dignitatem, in particular, as a biblical theological
meditation, be an incentive for everyone, both women and men, and especially for those who
devote their lives to the human sciences and theological disciplines, to pursue on the basis of the
personal dignity of man and woman and their mutual relationship, a critical study to better and
more deeply understand the values and specific gifts of femininity and masculinity, not only in the
surroundings of social living but also and above all in living as Christians and as members of the
Church.
This meditation on the anthropological and theological foundations of women ought to enlighten
and guide the Christian response to the most frequently asked questions, oftentimes so crucial, on
the "place" that women can have and ought to have in the Church and in society.
It is quite clear from the words and attitude of Christ, which are normative for the Church, that no
discrimination exists on the level of an individual's relation to Christ, in which "there is neither male
nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus"  and on the level of participation in the
Church's life of grace and holiness, as Joel's prophecy led at Pentecost wonderfully attests: "I
will pour out my spirit on all flesh; your sons and daughters shall prophecy".
As the Apostolic Letter on the Dignity and Vocation of Woman reads: "Both women and men...
are equally capable of receiving the outpouring of divine truth and love in the Holy Spirit. Both
receive his salvific and sanctifying 'visits'".
Mission in the Church and in the World
5In speaking about participation in the apostolic mission of the Church, there is no doubt that in
virtue of Baptism and Confirmation, a woman-as well as a man-is made a sharer in the threefold
mission of Jesus Christ, Priest, Prophet and King, and is thereby charged and given the ability to
l the fundamental apostolate of the Church: evangelization. However, a woman is called to put
to work in this apostolate the "gifts" which are properly hers: first of all, the gift that is her very
dignity as a person exercised in word and testimony of life, gifts therefore, connected with her
vocation as a woman.
In her participation in the life and mission of the Church a woman cannot receive the Sacrament of
Orders, and therefore, cannot  the proper function of the ministerial priesthood. This is a
practice that the Church has always found in the expressed will of Christ, totally free and
sovereign, who called only men to be his apostles; a practice that can be understood from the
rapport between Christ, the Spouse, and his Bride, the Church. Here we are in the area of
function, not of dignity and holiness. In fact, it must be maintained: "Although the Church
possesses a 'hierarchical' structure, nevertheless this structure is totally ordered to the holiness of
Christ's members".
However, as Paul VI has already said, "We cannot change what our Lord did, nor his call to
women; but we can recognize and promote the role of women in the mission of evangelization and
in the life of the Christian community.
Above all the acknowledgment in theory of the active and responsible presence of woman in the
Church must be realized in practice. With this in mind this Exhortation addressed to the lay faithful
with its deliberate and repeated use of the terms "women and men", must be read. Furthermore
the revised Code of Canon Law contains many provisions on the participation of women in the life
and mission of the Church: they are provisions that must be more commonly known and,
according to the diverse sensibilities of culture and opportuneness in a pastoral situation, be
realized with greater timeliness and determination.
An example comes to mind in the participation of women on diocesan and parochial Pastoral
Councils as well as Diocesan Synods and particular Councils. In this regard the Synod Fathers
have written: "Without discrimination women should be participants in the life of the Church, and
also in consultation and the process of coming to decisions".And again: "Women, who
already hold places of great importance in transmitting the faith and offering every kind of service
in the life of the Church, ought to be associated in the preparation of pastoral and missionary
documents and ought to be recognized as cooperators in the mission of the church in the family, in
professional life and in the civil community".
In the more specific area of evangelization and catechesis the particular work that women have in
the transmission of the faith, not only in the family but also in the various educational
environments, is to be more strongly fostered. In broader terms, this should be applied in all that
regard embracing the Word of God, its understanding and its communication, as well as its study,
research and theological teaching.
While she is to l her duty to evangelize, woman is to feel more acutely her need to be
evangelized. Thus, with her vision illumined by faith, woman is to be able to
distinguish what truly responds to her dignity as a person and to her vocation from all that, under
the pretext of this "dignity" and in the name of "freedom" and "progress", militates against true
values. On the contrary, these false values become responsible for the moral degradation of the
person, the environment and society. This same "discernment", made possible and demanded
from Christian women's participation in the prophetic mission of Christ and his Church, recurs with
continued urgency throughout history. This "discernment", often mentioned by the Apostle Paul, is
not only a matter of evaluating reality and events in the light of faith, but also involves a real
decision and obligation to employ it, not only in Church life but also in human society.
It can be said that the problems of today's world already cited in the second part of the Council's
Constitution Gaudium et Spes, which remain unresolved and not at all affected by the passage of
time, must witness the presence and commitment of women with their irreplaceable and
customary contributions.
In particular, two great tasks entrusted to women merit the attention of everyone.
First of all, the task of bringing full dignity to the conjugal lite and to motherhood. Today new
possibilities are opened to women for a deeper understanding and a richer realization of human
and Christian values implied in the conjugal life and the experience of motherhood. Man himselfhusband and father-can be helped to overcome forms of absenteeism and of periodic presence as
well as a partial fulfillment of parental responsibilities-indeed he can be involved in new and
significant relations of interpersonal communion-precisely as a result of the intelligent, loving and
decisive intervention of woman.
Secondly, women have the task of assuring the moral dimension of culture, the dimension, namely
of a culture worthy of the person, of an individual yet social life. The Second Vatican Council
seems to connect the moral dimension of culture with the participation of the lay faithful in the
kingly mission of Christ: "Let the lay faithful by their combined efforts remedy the institutions and
conditions of the world when the latter are an inducement to sin, that all such things may be
conformed to the norms of justice, and may favor the practice of virtue rather than hindering it. By
so doing, they will infuse culture and human works with a moral value".
As women increasingly participate more fully and responsibly in the activities of institutions which
are associated with safeguarding the basic duty to human values in various communities, the
words of the Council just quoted point to an important field in the apostolate of women: in all
aspects of the life of such communities, from the socio-economic to the sociopolitical dimension,
the personal dignity of woman and her specific vocation ought to be respected and promoted.
Likewise this should be the case in living situations not only affecting the individual but also
communities, not only in forms left to personal freedom and responsibility, but even in those
guaranteed by just civil laws.
"It is not good for man to be alone: let us make him a helper fit for him". God entrusted
the human being to woman. Certainly, every human being is entrusted to each and every other
human being, but in a special way the human being is entrusted to woman, precisely because the
woman in virtue of her special experience of motherhood is seen to have a specific sensitivity
towards the human person and all that constitutes the individual's true welfare, beginning with the
fundamental value of life. How great are the possibilities and responsibilities of woman in this area,
at a time when the development of science and technology is not always inspired and measured
by true wisdom, with the inevitable risk of "de-humanizing" human life, above all when it would
demand a more intense love and a more generous acceptance.
The participation of women in the life of the Church and society in the sharing of her gifts is
likewise the path necessary of her personal fulfillment-on which so many justly insist today-and the
basic contribution of woman to the enrichment of Church communion and the dynamism in the
apostolate of the People of God.
From this perspective the presence also of men, together with women, ought to be considered.
The Presence and Collaboration of Men Together with Women
5Many voices were raised in the Synod Hall expressing the fear that excessive insistence given
to the status and role of women would lead to an unacceptable omission, that, in point, regarding
men. In reality, various sectors in the Church must lament the absence or the scarcity of the
presence of men, some of whom abdicate their proper Church responsibilities, allowing them to be
led only by women. Such instances are participation in the liturgical prayer of the Church,
education and, in particular, catechesis of their own sons and daughters and other children,
presence at religious and cultural meetings, and collaboration in charitable and missionary
initiatives.
Therefore, the coordinated presence of both men and women is to be pastorally urged so that the
participation of the lay faithful in the salvific mission of the Church might be rendered more rich,
complete and harmonious.
The fundamental reason that requires and explains the presence and the collaboration of both
men and women is not only, as it was just emphasized, the major source of meaning and efficacy
in the pastoral action of the Church, nor even less is it the simple sociological fact of sharing a life
together as human beings, which is natural for man and woman. It is, rather, the original plan of
the Creator who from the "beginning" willed the human being to be a "unity of the two", and willed
man and woman to be the prime community of persons, source of every other community, and, at
the same time, to be a "sign" of that interpersonal communion of love which constitutes the
mystical, intimate life of God, One in Three.
Precisely for this reason, the most common and widespread way, and at the same time,
fundamental way, to assure this coordinated and harmonious presence of men and women in the
life and mission of the Church, is the fulfillment of the tasks and responsibilities of the couple and
the Christian family, in which the variety of diverse forms of life and love is seen and
communicated: conjugal, paternal and maternal, filial and familial. We read in the Exhortation
Familiaris Consortio: "Since the Christian family is a community in which the relationships are
renewed by Christ through faith and the sacraments, the family's sharing in the Church's mission
should follow a community pattern: the spouses together as a couple, the parents and children as
a family, must live their service to the Church and to the world... The Christian family also builds
up the Kingdom of God in history through the everyday realities that concern and distinguish its
state of life: it is thus in the love between husband and wife and between members of the family-a
love lived out in all its extraordinary richness of values and demands: totality, oneness, fidelity and
fruitfulness-that the Christian family's participation in the prophetic, priestly and kingly mission of
Jesus Christ and of his Church finds expression and realization".
From this perspective, the Synod Fathers have recalled the meaning that the Sacrament of
Matrimony ought to assume in the Church and society in order to illuminate and inspire all the
relations between men and women. In this regard they have emphasized an " urgent need for
every Christian to live and proclaim the message of hope contained in the relation between man
and woman. The Sacrament of Matrimony, which consecrates this relation in its conjugal form and
reveals it as a sign of the relation of Christ with his Church, contains a teaching of great
importance for the Church's life-a teaching that ought to reach today's world through the Church;
all those relations between man and woman must be imbued by this spirit. The Church should
even more fully rely on the riches found here". These same Fathers have rightly emphasized
that "the esteem for virginity and reverence for motherhood must be respectively restored",
and still again they have called for the development of diverse and complementary vocations in
the living context of Church communion and in the service of its continued growth.
The Sick and the Suffering
5People are called to joy. Nevertheless, each day they experience many forms of suffering and
pain. The Synod Fathers in addressing men and women affected by these various forms of
suffering and pain used the following words in their final Message: "You who are the abandoned
and pushed to the edges of our consumer society; you who are sick, people with disabilities, the
poor and hungry, migrants and prisoners, refugees, unemployed, abandoned children and old
people who feel alone; you who are victims of war and all kinds of violence: the Church reminds
you that she shares your suffering. She takes it to the Lord, who in turn associates you with his
redeeming Passion. You are brought to life in the light of his resurrection. We need you to teach
the whole world what love is. We will do everything we can so that you may find your rightful place
in the Church and in society".
In the context of such a limitless world as human suffering, We now turn our attention to all those
struck down by sickness in its various forms: sickness is indeed the most frequent and common
expression of human suffering.
The Lord addresses his call to each and every one. Even the sick are sent forth as laborers into
the Lord's vineyard: the weight that wearies the body's members and dissipates the soul's serenity
is far from dispensing a person from working in the vineyard. Instead the sick are called to live
their human and Christian vocation and to participate in the growth of the Kingdom of God in a
new and even more valuable manner. The words of the apostle Paul ought to become their
approach to life or, better yet, cast an illumination to permit them to see the meaning of grace in
their very situation: "In my flesh I complete what is lacking in Christ's afflictions for the sake of his
body, that is, the Church". Precisely in arriving at this realization, the apostle is raised
up in joy: "I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake". In the same way many of the sick
can become bearers of the "joy inspired by the Holy Spirit in much affliction"  and
witnesses to Jesus' resurrection. A handicapped person expressed these sentiments in a
presentation in the Synod Hall: "It is very important to make clear that Christians who live in
situations of illness, pain and old age are called by God not only to unite their suffering to Christ's
Passion but also to receive in themselves now, and to transmit to others, the power of renewal and
the joy of the risen Christ".
On the Church's part-as it reads in the Apostolic Letter Salvifici Doloris-"Born in the mystery of
Redemption in the Cross of Christ, the Church has to try to meet man in a special way on the path
of suffering. In this meeting man 'becomes the way for the Church', and this is one of the most
important ways". At this moment the suffering individual is the way of the Church because
that person is, first of all, the way of Christ Himself, who is the Good Samaritan who "does not
pass by", but "has compassion on him, went to him... bound up his wounds... took care of him".
From century to century the Christian community in revealing and communicating its healing love
and the consolation of Jesus Christ has reenacted the gospel parable of the Good Samaritan in
caring for the vast multitude of persons who are sick and suffering. This came about through the
untiring commitment of all those who have taken care of the sick and suffering as a result of
science and the medical arts as well as the skilled and generous service of healthcare workers.
Today there is an increase in the presence of lay women and men in Catholic hospital and
healthcare institutions. At times the lay faithful's presence in these institutions is total and
exclusive. It is to just such people-doctors, nurses, other healthcare workers, volunteers-that the
call becomes the living signof Jesus Christ and his Church in showing love towards the sick and
suffering.
Renewed Pastoral Action
5It is necessary that this most precious heritage, which the Church has received from Jesus
Christ, "Physician of the body and the spirit", must never diminish but always must come to
be more valued and enriched through renewal and decisive initiatives of pastoral activity for and
with the sick and suffering. This activity must be capable of sustaining and fostering attention,
nearness, presence, listening, dialogue, sharing, and real help toward individuals in moments
when sickness and suffering sorely test not only faith in life but also faith in God and his love as
Father. Such pastoral initiatives find most meaningful expression in sacramental celebrations with
and for the sick, as a source of strength amid pain and weakness, hope amid despair, and as an
occasion of joyful encounter.
One of the basic objectives of this renewed and intensified pastoral action, which must involve all
components of the ecclesial community in a coordinated way, is an attitude which looks upon the
sick person, the bearer of a handicap, or the suffering individual, not simply as an object of the
Church's love and service, but as an active and responsible participant in the work of
evangelization and salvation. From this perspective the Church has to let the good news resound
within a society and culture, which, having lost the sense of human suffering, "censors" all talk on
such a hard reality of life. Thegood news is the proclamation that suffering can even have a
positive meaning for the individual and for society itself, since each person is called to a form of
participation in the salvific suffering of Christ and in the joy of resurrection, as well as, thereby, to
become a force for the sanctification and building up of the Church.
The proclamation of this good news gains credibility when it is not simply voiced in words, but
passes into a testimony of life, both in the case of all those who lovingly care for the sick, the
handicapped and the suffering, as well as the suffering themselves who are increasingly made
more conscious and responsible of their place and task within and on behalf of the Church.
In order that "the civilization of love" can flourish and produce fruit in this vast world of human pain,
I invite all to reread and meditate on the Apostolic Letter, Salvifici Doloris, from which I am pleased to
again propose the lines from its conclusion: "There should come together in spirit beneath the
Cross of Calvary all suffering people who believe in Christ, and particularly those who suffer
because of their faith in him who is the Crucified and Risen One, so that the offering of their
sufferings may hasten the fulfillment of the prayer of the Savior himself that all may be one. Let
there also gather beneath the Cross all people of good will, for on this Cross is the 'Redeemer of
Man', the Man of Sorrows, who has taken upon himself the physical and moral sufferings of the
people of all times, so that in love they may find the salvific meaning of their sorrow and valid
answers to all their questions.
Together with Mary, Mother of Christ, who stood beneath the Cross, we pause beside all the
crosses of contemporary man and we ask all of you who suffer to support us. We ask precisely
you who are weak to become a source of strength for the Church and humanity. In the terrible
battle between the forces of good and evil revealed to our eyes by our modern world, may your
sufferings in union with the Cross of Christ be victorious".
The States of Life and Vocations
All the members of the People of God -clergy, men and women religious, the lay faithful-are
laborers in the vineyard. At one and the same time they all are the goal and subjects of Church
communion as well as of participation in the mission of salvation. Every one of us possessing
charisms and ministries, diverse yet complementary, works in the one and the same vineyard of
the Lord.
Simply in being Christians, even before actually doing the works of a Christian, all are branches of
the one fruitful vine which is Christ.
All are living members of the one Body of the Lord built up through the power of the Spirit. The
significance of "being" a Christian does not come about simply from the life of grace and holiness
which is the primary and more productive source of the apostolic and missionary fruitfulness of
Holy Mother Church. Its meaning also arises from the state of life that characterizes the clergy,
men and women religious, members of secular institutes and the lay faithful.
In Church Communion the states of life by being ordered one to the other are thus bound together
among themselves. They all share in a deeply basic meaning: that of being the manner of living
out the commonly shared Christian dignity and the universal call to holiness in the perfection of
love. They are different yet complementary, in the sense that each of them has a basic and
unmistakable character which sets each apart, while at the same time each of them is seen in
relation to the other and placed at each other's service.
Thus the lay state of life has its distinctive feature in its secular character. It ls an ecclesial
service in bearing witness and, in its own way recalling for priests, women and men religious, the
significance of the earthly and temporal realities in the salvific plan of God. In turn, the ministerial
priesthood represents in different times and places, the permanent guarantee of the sacramental
presence of Christ, the Redeemer. The religious state bears witness to the eschatological
character of the Church, that is, the straining towards the Kingdom of God that is prefigured and in
some way anticipated and experienced even now through the vows of chastity, poverty and
obedience.
All the states of life, whether taken collectively or individually in relation to the others, are at the
service of the Church's growth. While different in expression they are deeply united in the Church's
"mystery of communion" and are dynamically coordinated in its unique mission.
Thus in the diversity of the states of life and the variety of vocations this same, unique mystery of
the Church reveals and experiences anew the infinite richness of the mystery of Jesus Christ. The
Fathers were fond of referring to the Church as a field of a pleasing and wonderful variety of
herbs, plants, flowers and fruits. Saint Ambrose writes: "A field produces many fruits, but the one
which has an abundance of both fruits and flowers is far better. The field of holy Church is fruitful
in both one and the other. In this field there are the priceless buds of virginity blossoming forth,
widowhood stands out boldly as the forest in the plain; elsewhere the rich harvest of weddings
blessed by the Church fills the great granary of the world with abundant produce, and the winepresses of the Lord Jesus overflow with the grapes of a productive vine, enriches Christian
marriages".
The Various Vocations in the Lay State
The Church's rich variety is manifested still further from within each state of life. Thus within
the lay state diverse "vocations" are given, that is, there are different paths in the spiritual life and
the apostolate which are taken by individual members of the lay faithful. In the field of a
"commonly shared" lay vocation "special" lay vocations flourish. In this area we can also recall the
spiritual experience of the flourishing of diverse forms of secular institutes that have developed
recently in the Church. These offer the lay faithful, and even priests, the possibility of professing
the evangelical counsels of poverty, chastity and obedience through vows or promises, while fully
maintaining one's lay or clerical state. In this regard the Synod Fathers have commented,
"The Holy Spirit stirs up other forms of self-giving to which people who remain fully in the lay state
devote themselves".
We can conclude by reading a beautiful passage taken from Saint Francis de Sales, who
promoted lay spirituality so well. In speaking of "devotion", that is, Christian perfection or "life
according to the Spirit", he presents in a simple yet insightful way the vocation of all Christians to
holiness while emphasizing the specific form with which individual Christians l it: "In creation
God commanded the plants to bring forth their fruits, each one after its kind. So does he command
all Christians, who are the living plants of his Church, to bring forth the fruits of devotion, each
according to his character and vocation. Devotion must be exercised in different ways by the
gentleman, the workman, the servant, the prince, the widow, the maid and the married woman.
Not only this, but the practice of devotion must also be adapted to the strength, the employment,
and the duties of each one in particular... It is an error, or rather a heresy, to try to banish the
devout life from the regiment of soldiers, the shop of the mechanic, the court of princes, or the
home of married folk. It is true, Philothea, that a purely contemplative, monastic and religious
devotion cannot be exercised in such ways of life. But besides these three kinds of devotion, there
are several others adapted to bring to perfection those who live in the secular state".
Along the same line the Second Vatican Council states: "This lay spirituality should take its
particular character from the circumstances of one's state in life (married and familylife, celibacy,
widowhood), from one's state of health and from one's professional and social activity. All should
not cease to develop earnestly the qualities and talents bestowed on them in accord with these
conditions of life and should make use of the gifts which they have received from the Holy
Spirit".
What has been said about the spiritual vocation can also be said-and to a certain degree with
greater reason-of the infinite number of ways through which all members of the Church are
employed as laborers in the vineyard of the Lord, building up the Mystical Body of Christ. Indeed
as a person with a truly unique lifestory, each is called by name, to make a special contribution to
the coming of the Kingdom of God. No talent, no matter how small, is to be hidden or left unused.
In this regard the apostle Peter gives us a stern warning: "As each has received a gift, employ it
for one another, as good stewards of God's varied grace".
THAT YOU BEAR MUCH FRUIT
The Formation of the Lay Faithful in the Lay State
A Continual Process of Maturation
The gospel image of the vine and the branches reveals to us another fundamental aspect of
the lay faithful's life and mission: the call to growth and a continual process of maturation, of
always bearing much fruit.
As a diligent vinedresser, the Father takes care of his vine. God's solicitude is so ardently called
upon by Israel, that she prays: "Turn again, O God of hosts! / Look down from heaven, and see; /
have regard for this vine, / the stock which your right hand has planted". Jesus
himself speaks of the Father's work: "I am the true vine, and my Father is the vinedresser. Every
branch of mine that bears no fruit, he takes away. and every branch that does bear fruit, he prunes
that it may bear more fruit".
The vitality of the branches depends on their remaining attached to the vine, which is Jesus Christ:
"He who abides in me and I in him bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing".
People are approached in liberty by God who calls everyone to grow, develop and bear fruit. A
person cannot put off a response nor cast off personal responsibility in the matter. The solemn
words of Jesus refer to this exalted and serious responsibility: "If a man does not abide in me, he
is cast forth as a branch and withers; and the branches are gathered, thrown into the fire and
burned".
In this dialogue between God who offers his gifts, and the person who is called to exercise
responsibility, there comes the possibility, indeed the necessity, of a total and ongoing formation of
the lay faithful, as the Synod Fathers have rightly emphasized in much of their work. After having
described Christian formation as "a continual process in the individual of maturation in faith and a
likening to Christ, according to the will of the Father, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit", they
have clearly affirmed that the formation of the lay faithful must be placed among the priorities of a
diocese. It ought to be so placed within the plan of pastoral action that the efforts of the whole
community (clergy, lay faithful and religious) converge on this goal".
To Discover and Live One's Vocation and Mission
The fundamental objective of the formation of the lay faithful is an ever-clearer discovery of
one's vocation and the ever-greater willingness to live it so as to  one's mission.
God calls me and sends me forth as a laborer in his vineyard. He calls me and sends me forth to
work for the coming of his Kingdom in history. This personal vocation and mission defines the
dignity and the responsibility of each member of the lay faithful and makes up the focal point of the
whole work of formation, whose purpose is the joyous and grateful recognition of this dignity and
the faithful and generous living-out of this responsibility.
In fact, from eternity God has thought of us and has loved us as unique individuals. Every one of
us he called by name, as the Good Shepherd "calls his sheep by name". However, only
in the unfolding of the history of our lives and its events is the eternal plan of God revealed to each
of us. Therefore, it is a gradual process; in a certain sense, one that happens day by day.
To be able to discover the actual will of the Lord in our lives always involves the following: a
receptive listening to the Word of God and the Church, fervent and constant prayer, recourse to a
wise and loving spiritual guide, and a faithful discernment of the gifts and talents given by God, as
well as the diverse social and historic situations in which one lives.
Therefore, in the life of each member of the lay faithful there are particularly significant and
decisive moments for discerning God's call and embracing the mission entrusted by Him. Among
these are the periods of adolescence and young adulthood. No one must forget that the Lord, as
the master of the laborers in the vineyard, calls at every hour of life so as to make his holy will
more precisely and explicitly known. Therefore, the fundamental and continuous attitude of the
disciple should be one of vigilance and a conscious attentiveness to the voice of God.
It is not a question of simply knowing what God wants from each of us in the various situations of
life. The individual must do what God wants, as we are reminded in the words that Mary, the
Mother of Jesus, addressed to the servants at Cana: "Do whatever he tells you".
However, to act in fidelity to God's will requires a capability for acting and the developing of that
capability. We can rest assured that this is possible through the free and responsible collaboration
of each of us with the grace of the Lord which is never lacking. Saint Leo the Great says: "The one
who confers the dignity will give the strength!".
This, then, is the marvelous yet demanding task awaiting all the lay faithful and all Christians at
every moment: to grow always in the knowledge of the richness of Baptism and faith as well as to
live it more fully. In referring to birth and growth as two stages in the Christian life the apostle Peter
makes the following exhortation: "Like newborn babes, long for the pure spiritual milk, that by it
you may grow up to salvation".
A Total Integrated Formation for Living an Integrated Life
5In discovering and living their proper vocation and mission, the lay faithful must be formed
according to the union which exists from their being members of the Church and citizens of human
society.
There cannot be two parallel lives in their existence: on the one hand, the so-called "spiritual" life,
with its values and demands; and on the other, the so-called "secular" life, that is, life in a family, at
work, in social relationships, in the responsibilities of public life and in culture. The branch,
engrafted to the vine which is Christ, bears its fruit in every sphere of existence and activity. In
fact, every area of the lay faithful's lives, as different as they are, enters into the plan of God, who
desires that these very areas be the "places in time" where the love of Christ is revealed and
realized for both the glory of the Father and service of others. Every activity, every situation, every
precise responsibility-as, for example, skill and solidarity in work, love and dedication in the family
and the education of children, service to society and public life and the promotion of truth in the
area of culture-are the occasions ordained by Providence for a "continuous exercise of faith, hope
and charity".
The Second Vatican Council has invited all the lay faithful to this unity of life by forcefully decrying
the grave consequences in separating faith from life, and the gospel from culture: "The Council
exhorts Christians, as citizens of one city and the other, to strive to perform their earthly duties
faithfully in response to the spirit of the Gospel. They are mistaken who, knowing that we have
here no abiding city but seek one which is to come, think that they may therefore shirk their earthly
responsibilities; for they are forgetting that by faith itself they are more than ever obliged to
measure up to these duties, each according to one's vocation... This split between the faith which
many profess and their daily lives deserves to be counted among the more serious errors of our
age".
Therefore, I have maintained that a faith that does not affect a person's culture is a faith "not fully
embraced, not entirely thought out, not faithfully lived".
Various Aspects of Formation
The many interrelated aspects of a totally integrated formation of the lay faithful are situated
within this unity of life.
There is no doubt that spiritual formation ought to occupy a privileged place in a person's life.
Everyone is called to grow continually in intimate union with Jesus Christ, in conformity to the
Father's will, in devotion to others in charity and justice. The Council writes: "This life of intimate
union with Christ in the Church is nourished by spiritual helps available to all the faithful, especially
by active participation in the liturgy. Lay people should so make use of these helps in such a way
that, while properly ling their secular duties in the ordinary conditions of life, they do not
disassociate union with Christ from that life, but through the very performance of their tasks
according to God's will, may they actually grow in it".
The situation today points to an ever-increasing urgency for a doctrinal formation of the lay faithful,
not simply in a better understanding which is natural to faith's dynamism but also in enabling them
to "give a reason for their hoping" in view of the world and its grave and complex problems.
Therefore, a systematic approach to catechesis, geared to age and the diverse situations of life, is
an absolute necessity, as is a more decided Christian promotion of culture, in response to the
perennial yet always new questions that concern individuals and society today.
This is especially true for the lay faithful who have responsibilities in various fields of society and
public life. Above all, it is indispensable that they have a more exact knowledge -and this demands
a more widespread and precise presentation-of the Church's social doctrine, as repeatedly
stressed by the Synod Fathers in their presentations. They refer to the participation of the lay
faithful in public life, in the following words: "But for the lay faithful to take up actively this noble
purpose in political matters, it is not enough to exhort them. They must be offered a proper
formation of a social conscience, especially in the Church's social teaching, which contains
principles - of reflection, criteria for judging and practical directives, and which must be
present in general catechetical instruction and in specialized gatherings, as well as in schools and
universities. Nevertheless, this social doctrine of the Church is dynamic; that is, adapted to
circumstances of time and place. It is the right and duty of Pastors to propose moral principles
even concerning the social order and of all Christians to apply them in defense of human rights
Nevertheless, active participation in political parties is reserved to the lay faithful".
The cultivation of human values finds a place in the context of a totally integrated formation,
bearing a particular significance for the missionary and apostolic activities of the lay faithful. In this
regard the Council wrote: "(the lay faithful) should also hold in high esteem professional skill,
family and civic spirit, and the virtues related to social behavior, namely, honesty, a spirit of
justice, sincerity, courtesy, moral courage; without them there is no true Christian life".
In bringing their lives into an organic synthesis, which is, at one and the same time, the
manifestation of the unity of "who they are" in the Church and society as well as the condition for
the effective fulfillment of their mission, the lay faithful are to be guided interiorly and sustained by
the Holy Spirit, who is the Spirit of unity and fullness of life.
Collaborators with God the Teacher
6Where are the lay faithful formed? What are the means of their formation? Who are the
persons and the communities called upon to assume the task of a totally integrated formation of
the lay faithful?
Just as the work of human education is intimately connected with fatherhood and motherhood, so
Christian formation finds its origin and its strength in God the Father who loves and educates his
children. Yes, God is the first and great teacher of his People, as it states in the striking passage
of the Song of Moses: "He found him in a desert land / and in the howling waste of the wilderness;
/ he encircled him, he cared for him, he kept him as the apple of his eye. / Like an eagle that stirs
up its nest, that flutters over its young, spreading out its wings, catching them, bearing them on its
pinions, / the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no foreign God with him".
God's work in forming his people is revealed and led in Jesus Christ the Teacher, and reaches
to the depths of every individual's heart as a result of the living presence of the Spirit. Mother
Church is called to take part in the divine work of formation, both through a sharing of her very life,
and through her various pronouncements and actions. It is thus that the lay faithful are formed by
the Church andin the Church in a mutual communion and collaboration of all her members: clergy,
religious and lay faithful. Thus the whole ecclesial community, in its diverse members, receives the
fruitfulness of the Spirit and actively cooperates towards that end. With this in mind Methodius of
Olympo wrote: "Those not yet perfected are carried and formed by those more perfect, as in the
womb of a mother, until the time they are generated and brought forth for the greatness and
beauty of virtue". This happened with Saint Paul, who was carried and brought forth in the
Church by those who were perfected (in the person of Ananias) and, then Paul in his turn, became
perfected and fruitful in bringing forth many children.
First of all the Church is a teacher, in which the Pope takes the "primary" role in the formation of
the lay faithful. As successor of Saint Peter, he has the ministry of "confirming his brothers in the
faith", instructing all believers in the essential content of vocation and mission in light of the
Christian faith and membership in the Church. Therefore, not simply the words coming directly
from him, but also those transmitted by the various departments of the Holy See call for a loving
and receptive hearing by the lay faithful.
The one and universal Church is present in various parts of the world, in and through the particular
Churches. In each of them the Bishop in his person has a responsibility towards the lay faithful, in
forming the animation and guidance of their Christian life through the proclamation of the Word
and the celebration of the Eucharist and the Sacraments.
Situated and at work within the particular Church or diocese is the Parish which has the essential
task of a more personal and immediate formation of the lay faithful. In fact, because it is in the
position to reach more easily individual persons and singular groups, the parish is called to instruct
its members in hearing God's Word, in liturgical and personal dialogue with God, in the life of
fraternal charity, and in allowing a more direct and concrete perception of the sense of ecclesial
communion and responsibility in the Church's mission.
Internal to the parish, especially if vast and territorially extensive, small Church communities,
where present, can be a notable help in the formation of Christians, by providing a consciousness
and an experience of ecclesial communion and mission which are more extensive and incisive.
The Synod Fathers have said that a post-baptismal catechesis in the form of a catechumenate can
also be helpful by presenting again some elements from the Rite of Christian Initiation of Adults
with the purpose of allowing a person to grasp and live the immense, extraordinary richness and
responsibility received at Baptism.
In the formation that the lay faithful receive from their diocese and parish, especially concerning
communion and mission, the help that diverse members of the Church can give to each other is
particularly important. This mutual help also aids in revealing the mystery of the Church as Mother
and Teacher. Priests and religious ought to assist the lay faithful in their formation. In this regard
the Synod Fathers have invited priests and candidates for Orders to "be prepared carefully so that
they are ready to foster the vocation and mission of the lay faithful". In turn, the lay faithful
themselves can and should help priests and religious in the course of their spiritual and pastoral
journey.
Other Places for Formation
The Christian family, as the "domestic Church", also makes up a natural and fundamental
school for formation in the faith: father and mother receive from the Sacrament of Matrimony the
grace and the ministry of the Christian education of their children, before whom they bear witness
and to whom they transmit both human and religious values. While learning their first words,
children learn also the praise of God, whom they feel is near them as a loving and providential
Father; while learning the first acts of love, children also learn to open themselves to others, and
through the gift of self receive the sense of living as a human being. The daily life itself of a truly
Christian family makes up the first "experience of Church", intended to find confirmation and
development in an active and responsible process of the children's introduction into the wider
ecclesial community and civil society. The more that Christian spouses and parents grow in the
awareness that their "domestic church" participates in the life and mission of the universal Church,
so much the more will their sons and daughters be able to be formed in a "sense of the Church"
and will perceive all the beauty of dedicating their energies to the service of the Kingdom of God.
Schools and Catholic universities, as well as centers of spiritual renewal which are becoming ever
more widespread in these days, are also important places for formation. In the present social and
historical context which is marked by an extensively deep cultural involvement, the Synod Fathers
have emphasized that parents' participation in school life-besides being always necessary and
without substitution-is no longer enough. What is needed is to prepare the lay faithful to dedicate
themselves to the work of rearing their children as a true and proper part of Church mission. What
is needed is to constitute and develop this "formation community" which is together comprised of
parents, teachers, clergy, women and men religious and representatives of youth. In order that the
school can suitably l its natural function in formation, the lay faithful ought to feel charged to
demand from everyone and for everyone a true freedom in education, even through opportune
civil legislation.
The Synod Fathers expressed words of esteem and encouragement to all those lay faithful, both
women and men, who with a civic and Christian spirit, l a task which is involved in the
education of children both in schools and institutes of formation. In addition they have emphasized
the urgent need in various schools, whether Catholic or not, for teachers and professors among
the lay faithful to be true witnesses of the gospel, through their example of life, their professional
competence and uprightness, their Christian inspired teaching, preserving always-as is obviousthe autonomy of various sciences and disciplines. It is of singular importance that scientific and
technological research done by the faithful be correct from the standpoint of service to an
individual in the totality of the context of one's values and needs: to these lay faithful the Church
entrusts the task of allowing all to better understand the intimate bond that exists between faith
and science, between the gospel and human culture.
"This Synod"-we read in the proposition-"appeals to the prophetic task of Catholic schools and
universities, and praises teachers and professors, now lay people for the most part, for their
dedication to maintaining institutes of Catholic education that can form men and women in whom
the new commandment is enfleshed. The simultaneous presence of clergy, the lay faithful and
men and women religious, offers students a vivid image of the Church and makes recognition of
its riches easier".
Groups, associations and movements also have their place in the formation of the lay faithful. In
fact they have the possibility, each with its own method, of oflfering a formation through a deeply
shared experience in the apostolic life, as well as having the opportunity to integrate, to make
concrete and specific the formation that their members receive from other persons and
communities.
The Reciprocal Formation Received and Given by All
6Formation is not the privilege of a few, but a right and duty of all. In this regard the Synod
Fathers have said: "Possibilities of formation should be proposed to all, especially the poor, who
can also be a source of formation for all"; and they added: "Suitable means to help each person
l a full, human and Christian vocation should be applied to formation".
For the purpose of a truly incisive and effective pastoral activity the formation of those who will
form others is to be developed through appropriate courses or suitable schools. Forming those
who, in turn, will be given the responsibility for the formation of the lay faithful, constitutes a basic
requirement of assuring the general and widespread formation of all the lay faithful.
According to the explicit invitation of the Synod Fathers special attention ought to be devoted to
the local culture in the work of formation: "The formation of Christians will take the greatest
account of local human culture, which contributes to formation itself, and will help to discern the
value, whether implanted in tradition or proposed in modern affairs. Attention should be paid to
diverse cultures which can exist in one and the same people or nation at the same time. The
Church, the mother and teacher of peoples, should strive to safeguard, where the need exists, the
culture of a less numerous people living in large nations when the situation exists".
In the work of formation some convictions reveal themselves as particularly necessary and fruitful.
First of all, there is the conviction that one cannot offer a true and effective formation to others if
the individual has not taken on or developed a personal responsibility for formation: this, in fact, is
essentially a "formation of self".
In addition, there is the conviction that at one and the same time each of us is the goal and
principle of formation: the more we are formed and the more we feel the need to pursue and
deepen our formation, still more will we be formed and be rendered capable of forming others.
It is particularly important to know that the work of formation, while having intelligent recourse to
the means and methods available from human science, is made more effective the more it is open
to the action of God. Only the branch which does not fear being pruned by the heavenly
vinedresser can bear much fruit for the individual and for others.
An Appeal and A Prayer
6At the conclusion of this post-Synodal document I once again put forward the invitation of "the
householder", proposed in the gospel: You go into my vineyard too. It can be said that the
significance of the Synod on the vocation and mission of the lay faithful might very well consist in
this call of the Lord which he addresses to everyone, yet, in a particular way to the lay faithful,
both women and men.
The happenings at the Synod have been a great spiritual experience for all the participants. The
experience has been that of a Church under the light and the power of the Spirit, intent on
discerning and embracing the renewed call of her Lord so that she can again propose to today's
world, the mystery of her communion and the dynamism of her mission of salvation, especially, by
centering on the specific place and role of the lay faithful. This Exhortation, then, intends to urge
the most abundant possible fruitfulness from this Synod in every part of the Church worldwide.
This will come about as a result of an effective hearkening to the Lord's call by the entire People of
God, in particular, by the lay faithful.
Therefore I make a strong appeal to one and all, Pastors and faithful, never to become tired of
maintaining-indeed always taking an active part to fix deeply in one's mind, heart and life-an
ecclesial consciousness, which is ever mindful of what it means to be members of the Church of
Jesus Christ, participants in her mystery of communion and in her dynamism in mission and the
apostolate.
It is of particular importance that all Christians be aware that through Baptism they have received
an extraordinary dignity: through grace we are called to be children loved by the Father, members
incorporated in Christ and his Church, living and holy temples of the Spirit. With deep emotion and
gratitude, we again hear the words of John the Evangelist: "See what love the Father has given
us, that we should be called children of God; and so we are".
While this "Christian newness of life" given to the members of the Church, constitutes for all the
basis of their participation in the priestly, prophetic and kingly mission of Christ and of their
vocation to holiness in love, it receives expression and is led in the lay faithful through the
"secular character" which is "uniquely and properly" theirs.
Besides imparting an awareness of a commonly shared Christian dignity, an ecclesial
consciousness brings a sense of belonging to the mystery of the Church as Communion. This is a
basic and undeniable aspect of the life and mission of the Church. For one and all the earnest
prayer of Jesus at the Last Supper, "That all may be one", ought to become daily a
required and undeniable program of life and action.
A real sense of Church communion, the gift of the Spirit that urges our free and generous
response, will bring forth as its precious fruit, in the "one and catholic" Church the continuing value
of the rich variety of vocations and conditions of life, charisms, ministries, works, and
responsibilities, as well as a more demonstrable and decisive collaboration of groups, associations
and movements of the lay faithful in keeping with the accomplishment of the commonly shared
salvific mission of the Church herself. This communion is already in itself the first great sign in the
world of the presence of Christ, the Savior. At the same time, it promotes and stimulates the
proper apostolic and missionary action of the Church.
The whole Church, Pastors and lay faithful alike, standing on the threshold of the Third Millennium,
ought to feel more strong]y the Church's responsibility to obey the command of Christ, "Go into all
the world and preach the gospel to the whole creation", and take up anew the
missionary endeavor. A great venture, both challenging and wonderful, is entrusted to the
Church-that of a re-evangelization, which is so much needed by the present world. The lay faithful
ought to regard themselves as an active and responsible part of thisventure, called as they are to
proclaim and to live the gospel in service to the person and to society while respecting the totality
of the values and needs of both.
Since the Synod of Bishops was celebrated last October during the Marian Year, its work was
entrusted in a very special way to the intercession of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of the
Redeemer. I too entrust the spiritual fruitfulness of the Synod to her prayerful intercession.
Therefore, along with the Synod Fathers, the lay faithful present at the Synod and all the other
members of the People of God, I have recourse at the end of this post-Synodal document to the
Virgin Mary. At this moment this appeal becomes a prayer:
O Most Blessed Virgin Mary,
Mother of Christ and Mother of the Church, With joy and wonder we seek to make our own your
Magnificat, joining you in your hymn of thankfulness and love.
With you we give thanks to God,
"whose mercy
is from generation to generation",
for the exalted vocation
and the many forms of mission
entrusted to the lay faithful.
God has called each of them by name
to live his own communion of love
and holiness
and to be one
in the great family of God's children.
He has sent them forth
to shine with the light of Christ
and to communicate the fire of the Spirit
in every part of society
through their life
inspired by the gospel.
O Virgin of the Magnificat,
fill their hearts
with a gratitude and enthusiasm
for this vocation and mission.
With humility and magnanimity
you were the "handmaid of the Lord";
give us your unreserved willingness
for service to God
and the salvation of the world.
Open our hearts
to the great anticipation
of the Kingdom of God
and of the proclamation of the Gospel
to the whole of creation.
Your mother's heart
is ever mindful of the many dangers
and evils which threaten
to overpower men and women
in our time.
At the same time your heart also takes notice
of the many initiatives
undertaken for good,
the great yearning for values,
and the progress achieved
in bringing forth
the abundant fruits of salvation.
O Virgin full of courage,
may your spiritual strength
and trust in God inspire us,
so that we might know
how to overcome all the obstacles
that we encounter
in accomplishing our mission.
Teach us to treat the affairs
of the world
with a real sense of Christian responsibility
and a joyful hope
of the coming of God's Kingdom, and
of a "new heaven and a new earth".
You who were gathered in prayer
with the Apostles in the Cenacle,
awaiting the coming
of the Spirit at Pentecost,
implore his renewed outpouring
on all the faithful, men and women alike,
so that they might more fully respond
to their vocation and mission,
as branches engrafted to the true vine,
called to bear much fruit
for the life of the world.
O Virgin Mother,
guide and sustain us
so that we might always live
as true sons and daughters
of the Church of your Son.
Enable us to do our part
in helping to establish on earth
the civilization of truth and love,
as God wills it,
for his glory.
Amen
