A Synod for Hope
A NEW HOPE for Lebanon was born during the Special Assembly of the Synod of Bishops. The Catholics of this holy land are invited by the Lord to live in "hope [that] does not disappoint us, because God's love has been poured into our c œ hearts by the Holy Spirit who was given to us". Thus renewed by God, the faithful of Christ who are in Lebanon will become for all their brothers the witnesses of his love. The Catholic Church wanted to associate with its approach representatives of the different Lebanese communities; it manifests and in the respectful dialogue and fraternal sharing, the building society is a œ out common to all Lebanese.
Lebanon is a country to which the eyes often turn. We can not forget that it is the cradle of an ancient culture and one of the lighthouses of the Mediterranean. Nobody can ignore the name of Biblos, which recalls the origins of writing. In this Middle East region where God sent his Son to accomplish the salvation of all men, for the first time, Christ's disciples were called Christians. Also, Christianity quickly became an essential element of the culture of the region and, in particular, of the Lebanese land, rich today of several religious traditions. Catholics from different patriarchal churches, as well as the Latin Apostolic Vicariate, live there. Therefore, from the awakening of his conscience, the young Lebanese catholic baptized knows Maronite, or Greek-Melkite, or Armenian Catholic, or Catholic Syriac, or Chaldean, or Latin. This is how he opens himself to the Christian life and is called to discover the universality of the Church. Christians from other Churches and ecclesial communities also reside in Lebanon. The other important part of the population is made up of Muslims and Druze. For the country, these different communities are both a wealth, originality and difficulty. But for all the inhabitants of this land, making Lebanon live is a common task.
At the closing Eucharistic celebration of the Synodal Assembly, I said: "All need the [social] dimension of charity, which allows men to build together. We know how much Lebanon needs to build and rebuild, especially after the painful experiences of several years of war, in the search for a just peace and security in relations with neighboring countries." I have also stressed that the commitment of Christians is important for Lebanon, "whose historical roots are of a religious nature. And it is precisely because of these religious roots of Lebanese national and political identity   that, after the hard years of the war, a synodal assembly was wanted and put in motion, so as to seek together the path of renewal of the faith, of a better collaboration and of a more effective common witness, without forgetting the reconstruction of society ". By collaborating with all their compatriots, Catholics are particularly called to serve the common good of the earthly city by drawing from faith their inspiration and the fundamental principles for life in society.
When, on June 12, 1991, I convened a special assembly for Lebanon of the Synod of Bishops, the situation of the country was dramatic. Lebanon had been deeply shaken in all its components. I invited the Catholics present on this earth to undertake a journey of prayer, penance and conversion, which would allow them to question, before the Lord, their fidelity to the Gospel and their effective commitment as a result of Christ. By a lucid return on oneself, accomplished in faith, the pastors and the faithful should be able to better discern and specify the spiritual, pastoral and apostolic priorities that they had to promote in the current context of the country.
From the beginning, I have asked the other Churches and Ecclesial Communities to join in this effort, also manifesting the ecumenical intention of the Synodal Assembly, because for the future of Lebanon hope is also linked to that of Christian unity. I also invited the Muslim and Druze communities to take part in the project; Although it was above all a question of a renewal proper to the Catholic Church, it was at the same time the material and spiritual reconstruction of the country, which was an essential concern of all; and this was possible only with the active participation of all its inhabitants.
These appeals were heard and I thank the Lord, which is in the c œ heart of men of good will. A wide consultation of Catholics has been undertaken. More than half of the responses to this consultation came from lay Christians, who wanted to express their interest, often critical, in the effort of ecclesial renewal that was appropriate to achieve in this context.
The Preparatory Council of the Synod studied the answers received and proposed as theme of the Synod: "Christ is our hope. Renewed by his Spirit, solidarity, we testify of his love. I gladly made this theme and I announced it and commented on it in a message addressed to all Lebanese in June
On the basis of the replies received, the Preparatory Council drafted an important first document, Lineamenta, which has benefited from numerous collaborations. The purpose of this document was to stimulate the prayer and reflection of all concerned, including asking a series of questions on each topic. The critical reflection that was thus launched was already promising. Conversion begins when everyone agrees to question their ways of being and acting, by confronting them sincerely with the Gospel message. This long process of maturation has resulted in many quality answers. Symposia were organized on various topics and their work published. Many parishes have brought together think tanks, where we worked Lineamenta, chapter by chapter. Groups of people, specialized in one or the other field, sent elaborate contributions.
The Preparatory Council returned to work to draft a text that took into account all the responses received. This document, the Instrumentum Laboris, was to provide the work program of the Synodal Assembly.
ToAs a result of this preparatory work, the Special Assembly for Lebanon of the Synod of Bishops met in Rome on Sunday 26 November It began with a Eucharistic concelebration in Saint. Peter's Patriarchal Basilica. This liturgy has shown what a Synod is: a celebration in the Church. Unity in diversity, a theme so often taken up during the debates, was first expressed by the solemn Eucharist in Saint. Peter's Basilica, to which all the participants in the Synodal Assembly were present. During the work of the Synod, we continued to pray together in the diverse traditions of the East and the West, asking the Lord to be present among us and to send us His Spirit to be together with us. Church and that we do His will.
Unity in diversity was manifested by the very quality of the participants. The Synod Fathers included all the Catholic patriarchs of the East, the archbishops and bishops of the various Catholic dioceses of Lebanon, the cardinals of the Holy See's dicasteries concerned with the questions of the Church in Lebanon, the Lebanese bishops of the diaspora, superiors general priests of the Orders founded and present in Lebanon, representatives of the major superiors and bishops representing the other Catholic patriarchates of the Middle East, as well as some ecclesiastical personalities particularly interested in the objectives of the Synod.
Also present were fraternal delegates from other Churches and Christian communities in Lebanon. I was also pleased to welcome the representatives of the Sunni, Shi'ite and Druze communities. Finally, there were listeners, priests, religious and lay people. All took part in the proceedings and expressed themselves freely, pertinently and enthusiastically, in both the plenary meetings and the restricted meetings of the intersections. In addition, the experts I appointed had very useful contributions to the smooth running of the Synod's work.
In spite of the necessarily limited number of guests at such an assembly, members of all categories of Christians and all parts of Lebanese society were there, accompanied by representatives of the Catholic Church from other parts of the country. world. Thus the local Churches and all the inhabitants of Lebanon were carried by the solicitude of the Catholic world towards this country.
The conclusion of the Assembly's work opens a new stage in the synodal process. A set of proposals was formulated and voted by the Synod Fathers. On the basis of these proposals and other documents of the Synod, the Fathers asked me to write a post-synodal Apostolic Exhortation, first for Lebanese Catholics, but also for all Lebanese. and to all who take to heart the situation of this country. A post-Synodal Council appointed by me, assisted by the General Secretariat of the Synod, contributed to the preparation of this document.
Here are the outlines of this Exhortation. After examining the current situation of the Catholic Church in Lebanon in the first chapter, the second chapter outlines the theological reflection that underlies all the orientations that will then be drawn in a concrete way. The third chapter brings together everything concerning the internal renewal of the Catholic Church in Lebanon. The fourth chapter concerns the communion between the different patriarchal Churches in Lebanon and even around Lebanon. A fifth chapter deals with the place of the Church in Lebanon today. The sixth chapter revokes the social and national dimension. Indeed, the Synod did not focus exclusively on the internal issues of the Catholic Church in Lebanon, but it had the whole country in mind, because the fate of Catholics is deeply linked to the destiny of Lebanon and to his particular vocation.
Dear brothers and sisters in Lebanon, this paper provides principles for reflection, directions for renewal, and concrete suggestions. He will be able to serve you in the coming years to guide you in a constant renewal. You will look for ways to implement what in this document is often expressed in the form of wishes. You will complete the proposed reflections because, in many cases, the Synodal Assembly has only opened up overall perspectives.
The momentum generated by the preparation and holding of this Special Assembly must be continued and steadily strengthened. The Synod inaugurated a working method based on the attentive listening of all the components of the Lebanese population in general and of the various categories and catholic institutions in particular. Continue this work and do not consider that the Synod is closed with the publication of this Apostolic Exhortation. I urge you to seek by all means to make fraternal and effective the receipt of this document and to implement what I propose here, in a constant concern for unity between Catholics and the good of all the people. Continue your critical discernment, be available to the action of the Holy Spirit and let yourself be inspired by the gospel of our Lord. So Christ will truly be your hope and his Spirit will renew you. So, in solidarity, you will continue to testify to his love.
Current situation of the Catholic Church in Lebanon
Unity and Diversity
One of the most obvious characteristics of the Catholic Church in Lebanon is to be both one and multiple. It consists less in a territorial juxtaposition of dioceses, than in an interweaving of patriarchal churches sui iuris and a Latin apostolic vicariate, all united by the same faith, the same sacraments and a total communion of faith and charity with the Bishop of Rome, Successor of the Apostle Peter.
You know the bonds of affection which unite me to this "beloved land," as I have had occasion to recall in many circumstances, and especially from the beginning of my pontificate. All Catholics also feel a strong attachment to their brothers in this dear country to their c œ heart of the Lord's disciples and to the whole world that our Lord stride and made it holy.
The diversity of the Catholic Church in Lebanon is far from being purely legal. It is the result of the long history of each of its spiritual traditions. Also, the patriarchal Churches, many of which claim to be the Church of Antioch, each maintain their own cultural heritage and specific ecclesial, liturgical, theological, spiritual and disciplinary traditions.
It is true that the Eastern Catholic Churches continue to develop from different perspectives, related to the current socio-political situation of the countries where they are present, as well as to the numerical importance and vitality of the faithful in the countries of the world. 'emigration. But at the same time, in Lebanon, the various sui iuris Churches and the Latin Apostolic Vicariate are one Church and part of the one and same Catholic Church around the Successor of Peter, in a community of life and destiny, shared for a very long time. long for some of them, in this region of the East and in this country, Lebanon. They face the same national requirements and the same dangers; they have the same hopes and especially the same mission entrusted by Christ.
The way of living the diversity of the ecclesial heritage is not always perceived as a positive element. It may even have aroused feelings of mistrust among the local churches, to the point of becoming a real obstacle to the path of understanding and collaboration. Thus, the interpenetration of jurisdictions has sometimes provoked real power conflicts  that paralyzed common pastoral action and thereby brought counter-testimony. Such difficulties can only be overcome in faith and through sincere mutual respect.
Today, the patriarchal Churches wish to go beyond all narrow-mindedness and open themselves up to a more and more intense collaboration between them, out of fidelity to the word of the Lord: "By this all will recognize that you are my disciples: if you have love for one another ".
It is therefore not surprising that the Special Assembly has considered as a priority for the renewal of the Catholic Church in Lebanon this call: "Let us convert and live the unity of the Church". The Message of the Synod emphasized noting that more than a new organization, what to promote is a new mindset that must resolutely mark each Patriarchal Church and "no longer a constant concern to affirm the differences, but the constant a concern to emphasize unity while respecting diversity ".
Such commitment implies both an admission, feelings of repentance, and a cry of hope; the admission of having lacked the spirit of communion in the Church; sincere repentance for having grieved the Holy Spirit, a divine leaven of unity; a cry of hope in the dead and risen Christ, living with us, among us and for us. By committing itself frankly in this sense, the members of the various local Churches are called to renew themselves internally in order to open their soul to the dimensions of the charity of Christ, in a holy emulation with their brothers of the other spiritual traditions.
The Catholic Church in Lebanon as a result of recent events
The Catholic Church in Lebanon has suffered greatly from the division of its sons, especially during the recent years of war. She was torn even from the inside. In 1993, those who prepared the Special Assembly wrote in the Lineamenta:"The Church in Lebanon [...] was, like other parts of the country, wounded in its flesh. But it was especially in her consciousness that she was deeply tested. She saw her sons killed, killing and killing each other. She continues to suffer from their constant quarrels; it deeply bruises the deep gap that these troubled years have dug between many of its faithful and between them and ecclesiastical authority".
Since then, signs of rapprochement between the members of the sui iuris Churches have been emerging in both minds and structures. In fact, the Synod of Bishops of each Patriarchal Church  is called to deal with the problems of the day and to ensure the unity of patriarchy, with the concern of an ever stronger union with the other patriarchies.
On the other hand, the Eastern Catholic Churches in Lebanon feel more than ever attached to their patriarchal structure, according to which the patriarch presides over the synod of bishops of his patriarchate. Their consultations help to make visible the mystery of the Church communion, both within each patriarchate and in its relationship with other patriarchal churches in the country and within the universal Church.
The collaboration is more intense between the members of the same patriarchal Church, the patriarch, the bishops, the priests, the deacons, the religious, and the laity. The lay faithful in particular are generously available and ready to respond to the calls of the hierarchy, to its requests for cooperation within the various diocesan or parish councils, in the administration of the waqfs. For other services of the Church. With regard to the clergy, the will to co-ordinate and collaborate should be manifested in the framework of the many structures, such as meetings of priests, priests with lay people, by geographical area or by interest, for purposes pastoral or spiritual. Such a will is supported by the grace of the Holy Spirit who assists and supports the Church. It deserves to be strongly encouraged; it is a call for dialogue and healthy and effective ways of working together; it also requires that all have a good knowledge of the authentic nature of the Church and the true meaning of Christian service. As I wrote in the exhortation on the consecrated life, the doctrine of the Church as communion allows "to better understand that its various components can and must join forces, in a spirit of collaboration and exchange of gifts, to participate in the ecclesial mission. It helps to give a more just and complete picture of the Church"
Moreover, the Eastern Catholic Churches of Lebanon have already created structures of consultation, coordination and cooperation among themselves. The model is the "Assembly of Catholic Patriarchs and Bishops in Lebanon" (APECL). This Assembly sits regularly to animate the reflection and to guide the common action according to the pastoral necessities. According to the wishes of the Synodal Assembly, it was reorganized, for greater pastoral efficiency, taking care to involve priests and lay people more effectively in common work and ecclesial decisions. The experience of the participants in the Special Assembly for Lebanon has shown how much Catholic pastors and faithful know each other and want to be a Church, and how much they value and value each other in their diversity. This time of grace will remain an inexhaustible source of energy, both for the momentum towards the strengthening of their unity and for the ever more genuine fulfillment of their specificities.
With other Churches and Christian Communities in Lebanon
At the end of the Special Assembly, after declaring that unity within the Catholic Church was not enough, the Fathers expressed their determination in favor of "dialogue with the other Christian Churches, to respond to the will from the Lord expressed in his prayer to the Father: "Holy Father, keep in your name those whom you have given me to be one as we are one. [...] That they are perfectly one so that the world believes that you sent me! ".
This commitment of the Fathers of the Synod reflects an awareness of the seriousness of the division of Christians. It also expresses the pain concretely felt in the face of such infidelity to the Lord's will. Indeed, the division of Christians often separates people who live side by side and who love each other, who share the same faith in Christ and Baptism. As for the Orthodox and Catholics, they have convergent conceptions on essential points concerning the Church and the sacraments. Many Christians united by the bonds of marriage, however, suffer, themselves and their children, to be torn between different doctrines about the Church and their duties towards her.
But if it is in itself a scandal from the point of view of the very nature of the undivided Church and from the point of view of its mission towards the world, this situation seems capable, in our time, of becoming a an occasion of grace: it acts as a stimulus and it incites the Christians to put all their conviction and all their energy to work for the communion of the Church and to perform gestures of mutual forgiveness. In fact, the Orthodox and Catholics are aware of the ancient ecclesial and social traditions that bring them together and their fraternity in Christ, even if sometimes, in past times, their cohabitation has taken on a stormy character. It is clear, however, that the method to follow towards full communion is the dialogue of the truth. This process should be conducted with great prudence and an attitude of faith, led by the Holy Spirit. The Ecclesial Communities that emerged from the Reformation, although much more recent in Lebanon, are also included voluntarily in this movement of rapprochement. All Christians in the country are eager to realize their full unity. With them and in communion with all our brothers in the faith, all over the world, we feel invited to redouble our fervor in prayer so that this vow may be led, so dear to the heart of our Lord. Moreover, from the first moment of the synodal process, the Fathers made their efforts so that, in their country, all believers in Christ, the Word of God incarnate, participate, at least by prayer, in the renewal of the Church.
Relations with the faithful of the monotheistic religions, and in particular with the Muslims
The Church is concerned with promoting unity and charity between men and between peoples. Indeed, "we can not invoke God, Father of all men, if we refuse to lead ourselves fraternally to some of the men created in the image of God". We are one and the same human community, which God has made inhabit "over the whole surface of the earth"; the Lord wants to lead men "to the knowledge of the truth" and l their thirst for eternal happiness.
The Catholic Church carefully considers the spiritual quest of men and readily admits the part of truth that enters into the religious process of persons and peoples, while affirming that the perfect truth is found in Christ, that he is the beginning and the end of the story which, through Him, reaches its fullness. On the other hand, by reason, the man knows what is good and, pushed by the voice of his conscience, he is bound to accomplish it and avoid evil. "The exercise of moral life attests to the dignity of the person". The Church shows great respect for those who, every day, strive to live in righteousness, according to fundamental spiritual, moral and socio-cultural values, by giving a price to their own moral life. Islam and Christianity share a number of undeniable human and spiritual values. Vatican Council II summed up the essentials: "The Church looks with esteem at the Muslims who worship the one God, Living and Subsistent, Merciful and Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth, who spoke to men, and to the decrees of which, even though they are hidden, they strive to submit with all their soul, as submitted to God Abraham, to whom the Islamic faith willingly refers. Although they do not recognize Jesus as God, yet they worship him as a prophet, and they honor her virginal mother, Mary, and sometimes even invoke her with piety. In addition, they are waiting for the day of judgment, in which God will reward all men after resurrecting them. That is why they value the moral life and worship God, especially through prayer, almsgiving and fasting ".
In Lebanon, relations between Catholics and with Muslims have been difficult on different occasions; and, for some Lebanese citizens, they could still be tinged with distrust because of various misunderstandings fueled by painful memories. Prejudices strongly anchored in mentalities contribute to maintain a lack of mutual trust. The awakening of various forms of extremism is also deeply worrying and could only serve the unity of the country, curb the new impetus that should be given to it and hinder the conviviality between all the components of its society.
For constructive dialogue and reciprocal recognition, beyond important differences between religions, it is important to focus first and foremost on what unites the Lebanese in one people, in the same fraternity which, in Lebanon, manifests itself every day, especially in the conviviality. In addition, Christians and Muslims in Lebanon regard each other as partners in the construction of the country; and the desire to strengthen the understanding and the collaboration between them is more and more alive in people's minds. Indeed, meeting bodies are set up to know each other in an ever deeper way and to serve the country together.
Secularization and modern world
Lebanon, traditionally open to all cultures that cross it, is, by the same token, open to ideas that are developing in the modern world. The Church is naturally called to be attentive to today's cultures in order to distinguish the wheat from the chaff. However, it is important that the country and the region do not let themselves be won over by the phenomenon of secularization. Some believe, however, that for the moment there is even rather a "return of the religious", in front of which it remains to be vigilant and to exercise a careful discernment of religious attitudes. If it is a question of drawing from the first sources of faith and hope, this can be the occasion of a "new evangelization" among the people and through it (otherwise, the movement may remain superficial and ambiguous. Nevertheless, a permissive lifestyle seems to be gradually contaminating manners, particularly through the means of social communication and through people who, for a long time removed from their cultural references, have been able to alter their moral and spiritual sense.. Many personalities, both Christian and Muslim, are worried about such an evolution.
These aspects of the current situation of the Church in Lebanon have only been recalled here to invite the faithful to return to a clearer awareness of the foundations of their faith and to understand before God the mission they have received. of the Lord. According to the concrete conditions they are currently experiencing, Lebanese Catholics have to distinguish in themselves and in their local Churches what should be kept and what should be pruned. This is the meaning of the call I made as soon as the Special Assembly was convened: "The Church in Lebanon will listen carefully to" what the Spirit says to the churches "and will carefully scrutinize signs of the times to discern God's present plans for the world".
Christians in civil society
It is obvious that the Christians of Lebanon, like all their fellow citizens, hope to enjoy the necessary conditions for the fulfillment of their person, their family, in the respect of their cultural and spiritual traditions. In particular, they aspire to tranquility, prosperity, a real recognition of essential freedoms, those which safeguard all human dignity and which allow the practice of faith; they aspire to a sincere respect for their rights and those of others; finally, to justice that enshrines the equality of all before the law and that allows everyone to take their share of responsibility in social life. They are well aware that such a project is largely conditioned by the past years of war and the grave situation in this region of the Middle East. I am aware of the most important current difficulties: the threatening occupation in South Lebanon, the economic situation in the country, the presence of non-Lebanese armed forces on the territory, the fact that the problem of the displaced remains as yet unresolved, as well as the danger of extremism and the impression for some of being frustrated in their rights. All of this feeds the passions, as well as the fear that the values ​​of democracy and civilization that this country represents may be compromised. And as a result, the temptation to leave him is still lurking for the Lebanese, especially the young (the fact that the problem of the displaced remains unresolved, as well as the danger of extremism and the impression that some people are frustrated in their rights. All of this feeds the passions, as well as the fear that the values ​​of democracy and civilization that this country represents may be compromised. And as a result, the temptation to leave him is still lurking for the Lebanese, especially the young (the fact that the problem of the displaced remains unresolved, as well as the danger of extremism and the impression that some people are frustrated in their rights. All of this feeds the passions, as well as the fear that the values ​​of democracy and civilization that this country represents may be compromised. And as a result, the temptation to leave him is still lurking for the Lebanese, especially the young. For a more serene future to materialize, I know that it involves a lot of sacrifices, a constant personal asceticism that makes one demand of oneself, before demanding from others, an active, courageous and persevering presence in the affairs of the society ; but we must also reckon with the grace of the Most High, who transforms hearts and wills, and directs them towards good. The past and present experience that the faithful of Christ have of themselves and others, around them and everywhere else, is sufficient to convince them of the power of the forces of evil, always present and always able to obscure intelligences, harden feelings and pose a threat to the future. But hope remains, in spite of everything, alive in them. They have not lost confidence in themselves or attachment to the country and its democratic tradition. The taste for life that characterizes them, and this fraternity among all, which manifests itself especially in the difficult times that they must so often go through, constantly revive their will to collaborate actively in the building of their country on the basis of human values. that make the wealth of their national heritage.
In the Church, to base one's hope on Christ
Call to hope
The Fathers of the Synod, starting from a careful examination of the present situation of the Church in their country, have incessantly returned to two main aspects of the Christian Mystery which it seemed to them necessary to deepen. It is for all the faithful to live intensely the Mystery of the Church, communion of men with God and with each other, and to base their hope on Christ. Following the reflections of the Special Assembly, I call the members of the Church to meditate on these subjects in order to answer ever better in their ecclesial life to the will of the Lord. They will more fully understand the scope of the theme that guided the entire synodal process: "Christ is our hope: renewed by his Spirit, supportive, we bear witness to his love".
The Church, mystery of communion
Dimensions of this mystery
The Church is not reduced to its visible dimension, which can make it appear only as an organized religious community; for in her mystery she is in communion with the invisible celestial community: "The Church of the earth and the Church so richly endowed with heavenly goods should not be considered as two entities, but they form a single complex reality, consisting of a closely related human element and divine element ". The Second Vatican Council further declares that the Church is an institution "endowed with the appropriate means for its visible and social union", an expression of the communion of men with God and with each other. It "is in Christ, in a sense, the sacrament, that is, the sign and the instrument of the intimate union with God and of the unity of all mankind". The destiny of all is played out in the Church, for it is "the mystery of the personal union of each man with the divine Trinity and with other men, begun by faith, and directed towards eschatological fullness in the Church. heavenly, while already being a seed in the Church on earth ".
The concept of communion is important for a proper awareness of the nature of the Church. It always implies a double dimension: vertical (communion with God) and horizontal (communion between men), and a double aspect: visible (bodily and social condition of the human being) and invisible (union of grace with God and, in Him, with all men).
The Church, in the image of her Lord, is a "divine and human reality that lives in time and place with all that entails as historical, geographical, social and cultural conditioning. It is rooted in this tangible reality to which it owes the features of its own face and its particular character ". The figure of the "body" means both that the Church is "gathered around [Christ], unified in Him, in His Body". And that this "unity of the body does not abolish the diversity of the members:" in the building of the Body of Christ reigns a diversity of members and functions. One is the Spirit who distributes various gifts for the good of the Church to the extent of his wealth and the requirements of the services "The Church is presented as a whole, as at the level of each parish community, "with a great diversity which comes at the same time from the great variety of the gifts of God and the multiplicity of persons who receive them. In the unity of the people of God, the diversities of peoples and cultures come together. There is a diversity of gifts, responsibilities, conditions and ways of life among members of the Church ".
The mystery of the Church is manifest in the particular Churches because, "within the ecclesial communion, there are legitimately particular Churches, enjoying their own traditions". The "particular church", also called "diocese" or "eparchy," refers precisely to the "portion of the people of God entrusted to a bishop so that with the help of his presbyterium he may be the pastor". And the bishop, because successor of the Apostles, is a visible principle and foundation of the unity of his Church. Whose solidity and growth he assures by faithfully teaching the word of God, by presiding, personally or by a delegated person, the sacred worship, in particular the Eucharist, and by wisely and charity governing the faithful of the flock who it is entrusted to him.
In Lebanon, as in the whole of the Orient, with the exception of the Latin Apostolic Vicariate, the particular Churches are traditionally grouped into patriarchies. "The patriarchal institution has been in force in the Church since the earliest times and it was already recognized by the early ecumenical councils". "As father and chief", it is the patriarch who "returns jurisdiction over all bishops, including metropolitans, over the clergy and people of his own territory or rite, according to the norms of law and remaining saves the primacy of the Roman Pontiff". He is therefore the symbol of the unity of his patriarchal Church; he guarantees fidelity to the liturgical, theological, spiritual and disciplinary tradition of his patriarchate as a whole, as well as communion with the Successor of Peter. "The patriarchs with their synods are the highest authority for all matters of patriarchy".
These ancient patriarchal churches have a venerable heritage, which should not only be respected and safeguarded, but also strengthen and encourage "vitality, growth and vigor [...] in accomplishing the mission. entrusted to them". The Second Vatican Council clearly recognized their legitimacy: "Divine Providence made the various churches, established in various places by the Apostles and their successors, united over time in several organically linked groups which, being saved the unity of faith and the unique divine constitution of the universal Church, enjoy a proper discipline, a proper liturgical use, a theological and spiritual heritage. Some of them, especially the ancient patriarchal Churches, like matrices of the faith, have engendered others in some way as their daughters, with whom they are until now bound by a closer bond of charity in sacramental life and in mutual respect for rights and duties. This variety of local churches shows with more brilliance).
In this context, the Catholic Patriarchal Churches in Lebanon can assume a prophetic character  if each of them succeeds in developing, in harmony with others and in absolute fidelity to the unity of the universal Church - and even through to this unity - its own identity and the riches that distinguish it. Unity is not to be sought in uniformity but in mutual love, in the gift of oneself and one's riches, in the charity that unites all the churches. This is what churches sui iurisand the Latin apostolic vicariate strives to live in Lebanon, thanks in particular to the activity of the Assembly of Catholic Patriarchs and Bishops in Lebanon (APECL), created "so that the life of the Church in Lebanon becomes a source of harmony and wealth for his sons, but also a permanent testimony of understanding and fruitful cooperation among all Lebanese".
Communion in the Holy Spirit, Divine Blast of Unity in Diversity
In order to grasp the profound reality of life in the Church, it is advisable to meditate on the presence in her of the Holy Spirit who vivifies it: "The holy Fathers have been able to compare its role to the function which the body ls. human the principle of life, that is to say the soul ".
The Spirit is the great gift of the Father and of his Son, Jesus Christ to the Church. This free gift is the fruit of the glorification of the Lord, in his death on the Cross and in his Resurrection. Christ had promised him the day before his death to his disciples: "It is your interest that I leave; for if I do not go, the Paraclete will not come to you; but if I go, I will send it to you".
The outpouring of the Spirit at Pentecost suggests a re-creation. On the evening of the Resurrection, Jesus breathed on the disciples and said to them, "Receive the Holy Spirit". It gives them a single c œ heart and puts a new spirit. This gesture recalled the first creation of man: "God modeled man with the clay of the soil, he "breathed" into his nostrils a breath of life and man became alive"; at Pentecost, this gesture manifests the new creation.
The gift of the Spirit turned the disciples into envoys, in the image of their Master: "As the Father sent me, so I send you". They are entrusted with a mission of forgiveness and reconciliation, a restorative mission of unity lost since ancient times. At Pentecost, the Lord gathered men around the Apostles who published his praises, and "everyone heard them speak in his own idiom, [...] Parthians, Medes and Elamites, inhabitants of Mesopotamia, [...] Cretan and Arabs".
The communion of men among themselves and with God is essentially the œ work of the Holy Spirit, who gives us to be God's image. It is He who gives to believe in Christ the Lord. By baptism, the Spirit is conferred on believers, in whom he dwells, as in a temple, and gives them to become "sons". "adoptive" of God "and therefore heirs; heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ". This adoption is not simple legal accession to the inheritance, but the gift of divine life in which the Three Persons are related: "The proof that you are the son, that God has sent into our c œ urs the The Spirit of his Son who cries out, "Abba, Father" and configures us to Christ. "We can worship the Father because he has made us reborn in his life by adopting us as his children in his only begotten Son: through baptism he incorporates us into Christ and his body, and by the anointing of his Spirit that springs from the head in the limbs, it makes us "christs".
On the day of his Ascension, Christ gave his disciples their mission: "Go: from all nations make disciples, baptizing them in the name of the Father and the Son and of the Holy Spirit and teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you". In other words, the Church is sent on the roads of the world, to "proclaim the Kingdom of Christ and God and to establish it among all nations, and it constitutes on earth the seed and the beginning of this Kingdom ". "The Church as a whole appears as" the united people of the unity of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit" under one head, Christ, by whom and for whom God is reconciled, "[having established] peace through the blood of his cross". In connection with the gift of the Holy Spirit, the Church constantly proclaims in the Creed her faith in the remission of sins, a power which the Lord has entrusted to her ministers. By "the communion with Him, the Holy Spirit makes spiritual, [...] brings back to the Kingdom of Heaven and filial adoption, gives confidence to call God Father and to participate in the grace of Christ, to be called a child of light and share in eternal glory ".
The Special Assembly of the Synod of Bishops was the occasion of an examination of conscience first intended to prepare the Church in Lebanon to receive a greater outpouring of the Spirit. For only the Spirit can lead to the metanoia, to the conversion that will bring this Church to better perceive its vocation and to resume its path with a new vitality, in a spirit of reconciliation between Christians themselves and between Christians and their compatriots.
On important points concerning faith in the mystery of the Church, we hold common positions with the Orthodox Churches. The theologies and spiritualities of the Eastern Churches have developed over the centuries, essentially around the theme of the deification of man, a deification already begun here below. This breath is the very one which inspired the Special Assembly for Lebanon of the Synod of Bishops: "We are committed to faithfully answer the œ work of deification that God works in us, and the expansion of God's kingdom on the earth ". The Catholic Patriarchal Churches in Lebanon are thus firmly rooted in Tradition.
The meditation on the Church, the mystery of communion, is inseparable from that of the mystery of the Trinity which is its origin and towards which it is moving. Through the communion of the Holy Spirit, the Church participates in the intimate life of God whose essence is the ineffable communication of love between the Three Persons. It is also called to communicate this divine life to the world and to prolong the mission of the Son and the Spirit. In it is accomplished the œthe work of the Trinity. So it is, in the Holy Spirit, inseparably communion, communication and mission: these are characters that develop in a continuous chain. This is the foundation of the pastoral aspects of the mission of the Church, and more specifically of the present post-synodal exhortation, because it is the Trinitarian unity that opens to ecclesial action in the world.
The God of Jesus Christ is not locked in eternal solitude, but is a relationship in the unity of essence between the Three Divine Persons and, by grace, self-giving to the world. Our knowledge of the mystery of Jesus Christ teaches us that the internal life of God is the total gift of the divine nature between the Father, the Son and the Spirit, the Father as the eternal source of divinity unreservedly pouring into the Son who He begets, the Son offering himself eternally to the Father in hymn of thanksgiving, in the Holy Spirit, the surviving form of this exchange of love, perfect and eternal.
In the light of the mystery of the inner life of God Trinity, we better understand the mystery of the Church, a mystery accomplished by sending the Son to men, and perfect by the gift of the Spirit to the Church walking on this earth for the glorification of the Father in the completion of the Kingdom in heaven.
Christ is the hope of Christians
Christ, Good Shepherd of His People
It is primordially in Christ, the Word of God incarnate, dead and risen, mysteriously present among them and with them on the paths of the world, that the hope of the faithful of the whole Church is founded. On these paths, he is their Good Shepherd, their true Light and the power of God among them. This figure of the Good Shepherd, found in the oldest traditions, was also one of the most constant themes of Christianity. The Lord Himself has thus been designated. Christians recognize a remarkably expressive image of the person of Jesus Christ. He is the One who loved them to the end of love. "No one has greater love than this one: give his life for his friends". His life, he delivered it out of love, freely and voluntarily. Jesus was entirely imbued with his infinite love of the Son to his Father. It is not to do one's own will that he descended from heaven but to do the will of the One who sent him. Jesus himself said, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" and "such is the will from my Father, whoever sees the Son and believes in him, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day". Let us meditate unceasingly on the ancient hymn that Saint. Paul tells us: "He, of divine condition, did not jealously hold the rank that equaled him to God. But he annihilates himself, taking the condition of a slave, and becoming like men. Having behaved like a man, he humbled himself still more, obedient unto death, and death on a cross". The Letter to the Hebrews shows in vigorous terms the meaning of the Lord's Sacrifice: "It is by virtue of this will [that of the Father] that we are sanctified by the oblation of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all".
Christian hope is based on faith in Jesus Christ and the gift of his love. By "the faith [which] is the guaranty of the goods we hope for [and] the proof of the things we do not see", we tend to l the promises of the Lord. This hope "responds to the aspiration to happiness which God has placed in the c œ heart of every man; it assumes the hopes that inspire the activities of men; it purifies them to ordain them in the kingdom of heaven; it protects from discouragement; it supports in all abandonment; it dilates the heartur in expectation of eternal bliss. The impulse of hope preserves selfishness and leads to the happiness of charity ". And it is love that gives all its dynamism to hope. It is not so much a question of seeking individual happiness as of seeking the happiness of those we love, of the whole human community in which we live. Love, in fact, is at the origin of the Incarnation of the Word of God, of the coming of the Holy Spirit and the foundation of the Church, communion of men with God and with each other. We put our hope in the very person of Jesus, Emmanuel, God-with-us. The desire to be united to the Lord and to be in communion with his brethren is the highest expression of Christian hope and love. We are generally far from fully experiencing this desire whose source is in Him who saved us by his blood and revived by his Resurrection. He is, in fact, the head of the Body of which we become members by baptism and to which we conform more and more by the Eucharist; he is the vine of which we are the branches and his divine life flows in us. It is the Spirit who inspired his Church to be won over by this "hope that constantly drives us to renewal, [...] in order to be configured to Christ". In the hope of the final fulfillment of God's plan, the Spirit and the Church say, "Come!" And let the thirsty man approach, let the man of desire receive the water of the life, free of charge. [...] Even so, come, Lord Jesus ". Good Shepherd of his people, the Incarnate Word is forever. He came to find the lost sheep and bring it back to the Father. From the height of heaven where he went to prepare a place, He intercedes for us with the Father. He confided to Peter, to the other Apostles and after them to their successors, to watch over his flock faithfully while waiting for his return at the end of time. To his Church, he sent the Holy Spirit and, by hiding from his eyes on Ascension Day, he assured him of his presence: "Behold, I am with you. forever for the end of the world".
Christ, true light of the world
The many difficulties that the faithful of Lebanon have had to face over the centuries and that they continue to experience in various forms - whether due to their own weakness or external circumstances - often constitute a serious impediment to their hope.. I hope that all may hear the call of the Synod Fathers in concluding their Message. Their point of departure was the meditation of a major page of the Gospels of the Risen Lord: "We are these disciples of Emmaus. [...] We too had doubted the presence of the risen Christ among us. But he joined us on our way [...]. We too prayed: "Stay with us because the night is coming". And then we recognized him sharing bread because he is the one who shares and shares. So we turn to you and say: "Brothers and œ sisters do not be afraid, Christ is risen; we found it; we will not leave him anymore". Yes, it is Jesus who opens the eyes of men to recognize his presence. In his light, the disciples understand that he asks them to live a demanding hope: "To hope is to commit oneself" to sharing and to communion, as requested by the Special Assembly.
True Light that revives our hope in all its dimensions, Christ is His Person, by his œ out and teaching. In His Person, we discover the meaning of our being and our mission. Because he is "the same, truly God and truly man [...], consubstantial to the Father according to the divinity and consubstantial to us according to humanity", we learn that the thirst for the absolute, which characterizes our human nature is not vain. With Him and in Him, the Kingdom of Heaven, the biblical name of the intimate encounter of humanity with His Lord and His union with Him, is already with us. In our history, through its small and great events, already begins our meeting of God and are lived constructive engagements which have a true value of eternity. The Second Vatican Council taught that "the importance of the earthly tasks is not depreciated by eschatological hope, but rather, thanks to this hope, the fulfillment of these hopes can be based on new ones. reasons ".
The Kingdom of God, prepared in the Old Testament, inaugurated in the New, will reach its fullness at the end of the centuries. From now on, "constituted Lord by his resurrection, Christ, to whom all power has been given, in heaven and on earth, now acts in the hearts of men by the power of his Spirit". At the end of time, when Christ has recapitulated all things in Himself, so that "God be all in all", the final realization of the divine plan will surprise us. However, just as in the man Jesus the divinity did not dissolve humanity but raised it to its highest perfection, so our incorporation into Christ and the recapitulation of time and history in him they will not abolish the values ​​of this world but will complete them: "These goods of human dignity, fraternal communion and freedom, all these excellent fruits of our nature and our activity, after we have spread them on earth, according to the commandment of the Lord and in the Spirit of the Lord, we will find them later, but purified of all defilement, illuminated and transfigured [...]. This Kingdom is already present on earth in mystery; he will know his completion at the coming of the Lord". In the "new heaven" and the "new earth" which will then replace ours, we will be grateful for the traces of what was most beautiful in this world and what we will have done better.
The Synod's call to "hope is to commit" means that Christians have an effective responsibility to hasten the realization of God's purposes; they can and must rely on the present presence of the Risen One among them and on the silent action of the Spirit in the world; guided and supported by the Word of God and by grace, they themselves must act. God pursues the economy of salvation with the freely agreed help of the just. It is the "Yes" of Mary that has earned us the Incarnation of the Son and it is thanks to the voluntary response of the Apostles to the call of the Lord that His divine Word has reached us. He who proclaims the Gospel is "the co-operator of God". By the mediation of the Church and helped by the witness of our brothers, we continue, according to the express will of Jesus to receive the divine life, to be united to the Body of Christ and to be reconciled to God. Even today, it is the will of Christ that the Christians of Lebanon make known and love his Name.
In this perspective, the Fathers of the Synod have neglected no aspect of the life, personal and public, religious and political, of their faithful: "In our prayers and our reflections, no essential question was excluded, no category of people have been neglected, no difficulty has been mitigated ". They synthesized the efforts they had made with all their faithful, clergy and laity, throughout their synodal process, to discern the "signs of the times" in the lives of people and local churches, in light of the life and teaching of their Master and Lord, our ultimate reference: "Lord to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life. We, we believe, and we have recognized that you are the Holy of God". In the light of the Gospel, they proclaimed that hope should stimulate the faithful in their commitments, without hesitation, in spirit and in truth, in communion with God and with the members of the Church, to make daily social life and more fraternal and just national.
The hope of Christians in Lebanon, therefore, is essentially to respond to the requirements of Christ, where he placed them, as the Letter to Diognet said:"They are in the flesh, but do not live according to the flesh. They spend their life on earth, but are citizens of heaven" and strive to make the love of the Lord perceptible. I will recall here wise words of the Council of Catholic Patriarchs of the East, addressed to the faithful of Lebanon: "The difficult situations that we face must not lead us to flee, to put away from our universe, or to dissolve us there. They must take us rather the roots of our faith to find the strength, consistency, confidence and hope". In this troubled region of the world, Christians have to become aware of the seriousness of their mission: "Our Christian presence - said the patriarchs again - does not want to be a presence for ourselves. For Christ did not found his Church to be of service to herself, but to be a confessing Church carrying a mission, the very mission of its Founder and Master. The defeat of witness and mission in our Christian life and in our ecclesial journey would amount to a renunciation of ourselves and the mission for which our Savior has called us ".
Christians are constantly called to overcome their anxieties for their own fate, in order to experience the true fear of the sages of God. To be unfaithful to him and to fail in his righteousness: "Fear nothing of those who kill the body, but can not kill the soul". To trust God essentially means to consecrate ourselves without delay to the service of the Kingdom of Christ: "Do not worry about your life for what you will eat, nor for your body for what you will clothe it. [...] Seek first [the] Kingdom [of God] and its righteousness, and all this will be given to you in addition".
Along the way, every human person encounters suffering. The disciple is no greater than his Master; like him, he must accept the Cross. The Christian does not seek suffering, he must fight against it, for himself and for others, because he knows that it is an evil, a consequence of the sin of men from the beginning. But when it is inescapable, he carries it in faith, in answer to this call of the Lord: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and let him follow me ".
This cross includes inevitable pains in the lives of men, but it also includes for the believer the suffering of being an obstacle to the love of Christ, a disfigured reflection of his face. By the grace of the One who has conquered death and sin, another logic must henceforth guide the Christian: "If anyone is in Christ, it is a new creation"  who obeys to the "Law of Christ", that of the Beatitudes and Charity which knows no bounds. This "Law of Christ" is the fruit of the Holy Spirit, it is "charity, joy, peace, long-suffering, helpfulness, kindness, trust in others, gentleness, self-control". It is the opposite of the law of the world subjected to the force of sin, which produces "fornication, impurity, debauchery, idolatry, magic, hatred, discord, jealousy, outbursts, disputes, dissensions, splits, feelings of envy, orgies, pleasures, and the like". As Saint. Paul recalls, every person in his flesh and in his spirit experiences this characteristic tension of the condition of sinful creatures: "I indulge in the law of God from the point of view of the inner man; but I perceive another law in my members which fights against the law of my reason and binds me to the law of sin which is in my members". And the consequences of the grip of sin can seriously compromise social peace and sustain destructive confrontations. In every cross that he accepts to carry for love of Christ, the believer knows that he participates with him in the salvation of the world: "I find my joy in the sufferings that I endure for you, and I complete in my flesh what is lacking in Christ's afflictions for his Body which is the Church". He also knows that the last word of this confrontation with evil, when conducted in Christ, is the triumph of the resurrection: "For if it be one and the same being with Christ that we have become by a similar death his, we shall be also in a similar resurrection". In the light of the Person, the life and the teaching of the Savior, the Catholic Church in Lebanon is called to renew itself, with the dynamism of hope and the generosity of love, at the price of real sacrifices. if necessary, in absolute fidelity to the Lord in the mission he has entrusted to him and the spirit in which it wants it to accomplish.
Christ, Power of God
The drama experienced in recent years by the Catholic Church in Lebanon was a cruel occasion for her to experience the necessity of conversion, to live the Gospel, to remain united, to truly dialogue with other Churches and Christian communities in order to move towards full unity, to build also, with the other citizens, a society capable of open dialogue, conviviality and attention to others, especially to the poorest brothers.
It is obvious that such a renewal is absolutely beyond human strength. Christians know this, and they are anxious to proclaim it so that God may be glorified. But they put their trust in God, "rich in grace and in faithfulness", and whose "gifts and appeal [...] are without repentance", he who know the depth of our weakness. They put their trust in Jesus Christ, because "all the promises of God have their yes in him", and "if we are unfaithful, remain faithful to him, because he can not deny himself". They put their trust in the Holy Spirit, which reminds them all that Jesus taught, which gives to renew form a single body and grow in communion and only hope.
So the Church in Lebanon has to rely on Christ, in the heart of his hope, Him, the Incarnate Word who has overcome sin and death. It is true that evil and death are not eliminated and that all feel the consequences of sin, whether in the individual being or in interpersonal and intercommunity relations. But through Christ, men can be in communion of life with God, and with one another.
To overcome fear, to convert to humility, to be able to disinterestedness, to overcome selfishness, to understand "[it] is more blessed to give than to receive", and that he is happier to take care of the other than to close oneself, no one can count on his own strength. Christ warned us, "You can do nothing outside of me"; he also comforted Saint. Paul: "My grace is sufficient for you: for power is unfolded in weakness"; and he told his disciples, "In the world you will have to suffer. But keep courage! I have conquered the world ".
Therefore, dear sons and daughters of the Catholic Church in Lebanon, the Special Assembly of the Synod of Bishops exhorts you to let yourself be seized by Christ so that you may progress in the communion that only He can make perfect. Then you will be able to pursue with courage a sincere and constructive dialogue with your fellow citizens. This dialogue presupposes a whole asceticism of listening and speech: wanting to know how to understand the deeper meaning of the speaker's speech and behavior, to grasp the source of his experience and the human perspectives in which he finds himself. express so that the word can truly be understood by the other and behave according to the gospel so that the testimony of life makes the word credible.
From the point of view of faith and charity, going towards the other can not be limited to communicating to him what we have understood of the Lord, but it also consists in receiving from him the good and the truth that he will have been given to discover. We are thus progressing in an ever greater knowledge of the one true God and of the One whom he sent, his Son Jesus Christ. For if "grace and truth [came] through Jesus Christ", the Spirit of God, who blows in the Church, also blows into the whole human community. As the Second Vatican Council teaches, "we must hold that the Holy Spirit offers everyone, in a way known to God, the possibility of being associated with the paschal mystery". "In the hearts of all men of good will, grace acts in an invisible way".
All this, the Church has learned from Christ, Good Shepherd, and it receives from him the strength to live, so that men believe in him and they enter the new life. Like John the Baptist, she is there to "bear witness to the light", because the Spirit revealed to her that "the Word was the true light, which enlightens every man" and that he is the only" Power of God and Wisdom of God". In him and through him, man knows himself, discovers the meaning of life and acquires the capacity to engage in real life and to lead others to it.
Synod for the renewal of the Church
Convocation and work of the Synod
The Special Assembly for Lebanon of the Synod of Bishops was convened first of all for the Catholic Church in Lebanon to be renewed in Christ our hope, by the Holy Spirit, that is to say that she is faithful to her vocation, to her mission, and to her reason of being in the Father's plan of love for the salvation of all men. In response to the invitation I had made in my Letter to the Catholic Patriarchs, Archbishops and Bishops of Lebanon, the Lineamentaproposed to all Lebanese Catholics a serious search for their fidelity to the mission desired by the Lord. "In the present situation, [...] the Church in Lebanon is wondering whether she has been faithful, if she is still faithful to what Christ has reserved for her, in herself and for her mission".
Reflections from the Lineamenta were synthesized in the Instrumentum laboris, and on this basis the Synod Fathers outlined areas where renewal is necessary and where deep conversions are indispensable; above all, it requires a continuous journey of prayer, sacrifice and reflection, to put oneself under the influence of the Spirit and to do the will of God, because it is He who gives growth and we are his co-workers.
At first, the Fathers determined what it means to be "renewed by the Spirit of Christ". Then, under the gaze of Christ, they asked themselves in truth what renewal are called all Lebanese Catholics, each according to his own charism within his particular Church as in the whole of the Catholic Church. Then, they looked for the transformations to be carried out in the main structures of the ecclesial institutions. Finally, with great pastoral concern, they considered how to initiate this renewal and how to train the faithful.
The Holy Spirit, agent of renewal
"Hope does not disappoint us, because God's love has been poured into our c œ hearts by the Holy Spirit who was given to us". Christ does not leave us orphans in our tribulations; it helps us in our weakness, to make us disciples according to his c œ heart. He gave us his Spirit as Comforter and source of truth: "When the Paraclete comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth which comes from the Father, he will bear me witness". "When he comes, he, the Spirit of truth, he will introduce you into the whole truth; [...] He will reveal to you things to come". To strengthen the faith, the hope and the charity of the faithful and to revive their missionary ardor, it is to these "future things" that it is appropriate to look, because it depends on the meaning of the history, of which Christ is the alpha and the omega, and according to the happiness to which he invites us, that the Lebanese Catholics are called to be converted and to change their life under the motion of the Spirit; thus, little by little, a new world will appear on this earth, with the help of the Holy Spirit, who communicates to us the new life that comes from God.
This is why the revival that the Synod should promote is, first, the œ work of the Holy Spirit. All Church members have to make listening, recognizing that they have sinned when they made their own will instead of God's will and that they wanted to achieve their personal projects instead of building the Body of Christ humbly following him who is the Head and which alone can lead the Church to its completion. The cooperation of all with the action of the Holy Spirit is the constant response to his great gift of renewal: "Let yourself be led by the Spirit. [...] Since the Spirit is our life, let the Spirit also make us act! To this end, the Synodal Assembly urges all those who have been baptized in one Spirit to come and drink at its source, so as to bear fruit in their personal life as well as in the renewal of the whole Church.
The sources and fruits of renewal
The Word of God
During her pilgrimage to the Kingdom, of which she is the seed and the beginning on earth, the Church is nourished by the living Word of God by the Spirit, which also inspired the Sacred Writers, thus giving each day to the people of God the opportunity to access the fullness of the meaning of this Word and to contemplate the Word of God "who has made himself a carrier of the flesh so that we may become carriers of the Spirit". "In holy books, the Father who is in heaven comes with great love to meet his sons and converses with them; but the strength and power which are inherent in the Word of God are so great that it is for the Church support and vigor, and for the sons of the Church the solidity of faith, the nourishment of the soul, a pure and inexhaustible source of spiritual life ". Following the Synod Fathers, I therefore invite all the faithful to a renewed listening of God who, in the Word made flesh, gave everything to the world, and "whose Holy Scripture is the privileged, faithful and truthful witness. Recalling the warning of Saint. Jerome, the Second Vatican Council did not fail to draw the attention of Christians to the place that should be given to the Word of God, because "the ignorance of the Scriptures it is the ignorance of Christ ". In the course of their history, the Eastern Churches have developed the reading of the Word of God, because "each one, according to his needs, learns from the inspired Scripture", especially by the lectio divina which allows to discover with certainty "that there exists in the Scriptures a kind of force which is sufficient, even without explanation, for the one who reads them". AT In the example of the Fathers, the Christian East has made an admirable reading of Scripture through a sapiential exegesis which closely links theology and the spiritual life.
The Synodal Assembly particularly emphasized the vital link between the Word of God and the Church in the mystery of Christ, who died and rose, Bread of Life for those who believe in him. It is Christ, the Word of God, who is proclaimed in the Church, and it is He who nourishes it at the two tables of the Word and of His Body, and who thus constructs it. "We have the food provided by the Apostles [the Word of God]; eat it and you will not faint. This food, eat it first so that it can come to the food of Christ, to the food of the Lord's Body". This is why the Church in Lebanon is today urged by the Holy Spirit to welcome the Word of God, to announce it and put it into practice. Also, in the ministry of the priests, the teaching of the Christian mystery must occupy a preponderant place and be the subject of a meticulous preparation. Indeed, faced with cultures and sciences that pose important questions to the faith, our contemporaries need a structured formation, a serious religious culture and a strong spiritual life, if they want to follow the Christ. I particularly draw the pastors' attention to the Sunday homilies, which must therefore be prepared with great care, by prayer and study. ATIn this regard, I strongly encourage the initiative to offer priests files containing exegetical analyzes that are suggestive of personal meditation and which allow the homilies to be prepared more intensely. The purpose of these is primarily to help the faithful to live their faith in their daily lives and to enter into dialogue with their brothers. In the same way, the spread of the printed Bible and the faculty for the laity to participate in exegetical training sessions allow "a greater number to read the Word of God, to meditate, to pray and to live it".
The apostolic tradition
It is through the unfailing assistance of the Holy Spirit that the Tradition received from the Apostles, that "living memory of the Risen One", is transmitted in the Church. In various forms, the Apostolic Tradition has evangelized the cultures present in Lebanon, taking care to take into account the rich spiritual sensitivities and local languages. ATside of the Armenian tradition which, while being original, is not unrelated to the Cappadocian and Syriac Fathers, there is the very old Antiochian tradition, of origin at once Aramaic and Hellenistic. All these roots are common to Eastern Catholic Churches and Orthodox Churches. This holy and living pluriform Tradition was transmitted by the Fathers of the Church and the spiritual writers, by the Divine Liturgy, by the example of martyrs, saints and saints. Faithfulness to Tradition allows a true "homecoming" through which the Holy Spirit wants to renew each particular Church, as well as to develop communion among all. In docility to the Trinity God, the current of the great living Tradition animates the Church, so that it announces in each culture and at each epoch the Christian mystery. "As the Church has developed in time and space, the intelligence of the Tradition of which it is a bearer has also known the stages of a development whose study constitutes, for the ecumenical dialogue and for genuine theological reflection, the obligatory path ".
During the Synodal Assembly, several speakers lamented that the faithful do not know their ecclesial tradition and that of their brothers. Others have affirmed that the rooting of the Antioch Churches in their common tradition is a vital requirement for their renewal, for communion among the dependent Catholic Patriarchal Churches, for ecumenical dialogue and for mission. That is why it is important to insist on the restoration of the patristic, liturgical and iconographic traditions of the Catholic Church in Lebanon, which offers the Lebanese people spiritual paths to meet the living and true God, and to become the living icon of Christ. Christian Arabic writings in the fields of theology, spirituality, liturgy and general culture will also have to be continued; so many treasures that have enriched the Antiochian tradition from the VIIth century. Finally, at the level of resources, many initiatives are to be promoted or encouraged: scientific research, translations, renovated programs in theological and catechetical training bodies, training proposals for adults and young people, as well as dissemination of information. biographies of witnesses of the faith of all times, knowledge of the high places of tradition and the desire to make known the traditions of the Eastern Churches in the Catholic communities of the diaspora.
Liturgy
It is especially in the Eucharistic celebration that the Holy Spirit renews the Church by conforming it ever more to his Lord. The Eucharist is the daily bread that unites us to Christ, who makes us living members of his Body and keeps us in unity. Thus, we become what we receive for, "the face discovered in a pure consciousness, reflecting as a mirror the glory of the Lord". The liturgy, source and summit of the life and action of the Church, is the celebration of the Paschal Mystery, especially in the Eucharist, but also in the other sacraments and in the Divine Office, also called the "liturgy". hours ". Throughout the year, especially in the parish churches where the Christian community assembles, it is in the celebration of the "Holy Mysteries" that the word of God is effectively "spirit and life" and that the holy Tradition manifests most its vivifying power. The intimate knowledge of the Holy Trinity is particularly realized in the constant prayer of the Church, by Christ, the only mediator between God and men, and by the Spirit who urges us to constantly repeat Abba, Father. Throughout the centuries, the "very rich liturgical hymnography has developed: [...] these hymns are largely sublime paraphrases of the biblical text", which the faithful assimilate to nourish their prayer.
Participation in the heavenly liturgy and anticipation of the "coming world", the Divine Liturgy is the gift through which the Eastern Churches have been able to stand in hope through centuries of tribulation. As a permanent source that nourished and animated the faith, today it requires a new pastoral approach in accordance with the guidelines of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, in fidelity to specific spiritual traditions. This new attention is essential, so that liturgical and sacramental ministry can develop and all the faithful can participate more actively in the liturgical life; thus, the celebrations will become ever more true and meaningful. I urge pastors to ensure that the liturgical reforms undertaken maintain the beauty and dignity of the celebrations, which form a common heritage of the Eastern Churches; it is essential that these reforms do not distort the theological meaning of the Holy Mysteries and that, according to the standards of the Catholic Church and in the respect of the ecclesial traditions proper, the different particular Churches are aware of being in communion and in harmony with the whole Church. To carry out the reforms, it will be good to follow the criteria given by the Instruction for the Application of the Liturgical Rules of the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, published by the Congregation for the Eastern Churches. In order to carry out this renewal, the Fathers of the Synod insisted on indispensable conditions: the work of liturgical commissions at the level of the Synods of Bishops of the patriarchal Churches, Eparchies or parishes, the initial and permanent formation of priests, deacons and lay leaders, as well as knowledge of liturgical traditions and pastoral care. Far from any search for prestige, all will be eager to reveal the deep truth and beauty of the mystery of faith that is celebrated.
Personal and community prayer
At the end of the interventions in plenary session, the synodal assembly summary report courageously recalled that the transformations in personal life and in social life require a deep liberation within the Catholic Church in Lebanon. inner liberation that comes to us from Christ through the spiritual life. Before therefore transform its structures, it is urgent that the Church in Lebanon is to be transformed by Christ and it accomplishes fully the work of every faithful deification theme so dear to Eastern theology. "By the power of the Spirit that dwells in man, deification already begins on earth, the creature is transfigured and the Kingdom of God is inaugurated". It is therefore important that everything be done so that the faithful are guided in the initiation to personal and community prayer, and that they can revive their spiritual life in their daily environment and in places of silence and welcome., and in the monasteries. It is also gratifying to develop prayer groups, called to be authentic ecclesial communities and witnesses of the strength obtained through prayer.
The renewal of people
Unity in diversity
One of the major themes of this Synodal Assembly devoted to Lebanon is that of unity in diversity. The Fathers have repeatedly stressed the necessary respect for the identity of each group and each person, as well as the urgent need to overcome the barriers that history has raised between the Lebanese Christian communities, so that all together become" the building stones of a tower [...] built on the rock of faith". This desire for collaboration and openness has not only manifested itself at the level of the various local Churches as a whole, but also at the level of the different categories that make up the people of God. Everyone has the right to be respected in his own spiritual process, but all must also engage in the path of dialogue with their brothers. The charisms and gifts entrusted to one are to be put to the service of all, through a common search for truth, in love.
The lay faithful
During the Synod, the laity present widely expressed the desire that the faithful may participate actively and responsibly in ecclesial life, in the various structures and various pastoral councils. They should be involved in the life of the Church at all levels, but they often wait for her to appeal to them and show their confidence. The missions of the laity are vast. It belongs to them, "because of their own vocation, to seek the Kingdom of God by managing temporal affairs and ordering them according to God. [...]. It is in this place that they are called by God, so that, by ling their own charge, allowing themselves to be led by the evangelical spirit, they contribute to the sanctification of the world as from within, in the manner of a close, and thus manifest Christ to others, above all by the witness of their lives, in the radiance of their faith, their hope and their charity", who unite them to their Lord. The management of public affairs and the government of the city are this scientia civilis, which unites men through the bonds of friendship, with the aim of building together a community of destiny and interest. whose vocation is the good of people and the service of truth, and to give every citizen the love of his country.
"In addition to this apostolate, which concerns all the faithful without exception, the laity can moreover be called in various ways to bring a more immediate collaboration to the apostolate of the hierarchy, in the manner of those men and women who assisted the Apostle Paul in the proclamation of the Gospel and who toiled heavily for the Lord". It is also important that lay faithful engage more directly in intellectual research and study, so that a true Christian culture in the Arab world can develop, with the support of pastors. In order to exercise their responsibilities, they must be able to find in their parishes and movements proposals for catechetical, theological and spiritual formation, which will help them to collaborate with the priests in their parish activities, with the concern of co-responsibility.
In this perspective, adult training centers will have to be created, to which the faithful will easily have access. Animation and administration can be taken in charge by all the patriarchies, in their various instances, or they can be the fruit of the close collaboration of several organizations, in a spirit of consultation with the other centers. existing; such structures will also make it possible to produce technical and pedagogical means adapted to the knowledge of the faithful. Building on the Catechism of the Catholic Church, the bishops in Lebanon are invited to continue publishing works presenting the Christian faith as a whole, which will take into consideration their cultural diversity. I salute the efforts already undertaken, along with other Catholics in the Middle East, to publish in Arabic texts of the Pontifical Magisterium and certain dicasteries of the Holy See. In addition, a greater presence in the media of social communication makes it possible to disseminate the teaching of the Church, either through newspapers, radio and television, or by preparing programs for the media that do not a purely ecclesial character, but who are willing to make room for religious programs in their broadcasts.
Family
​​The Message of the Synod clearly stated the threats facing the Lebanese family: "Family dismemberment because of the emigration of the father or children seeking employment or training; family life compromised by material difficulties; family life undermined by a misconception of spousal independence and a contraceptive mentality "Faced with this, the spiritual, moral and material support of future couples and families is one of the most urgent tasks.
It is first from the family that the social fabric is built, that the education of the youth, tomorrow responsible for the nation, is realized and that the Christian faith is transmitted from generation to generation. The Church trusts families and relies on parents, especially in the perspective of the third millennium, so that young people can know Christ and follow him generously in marriage, in the priesthood or in the consecrated life. "The baptismal priesthood of the faithful, lived in the marriage-sacrament, is for spouses and for the family the foundation of a priestly vocation and mission". The homes carry a rich spiritual dynamism and are the first places for the maturation of vocations. Through their way of life, parents testify to the beauty of marriage and the gift of self. The daily example of united couples nourishes the desire of young people to imitate them. "Little Church", the family is a school of love and the first place of a Christian and missionary witness, by example as much as by speech. The mystery of love between man and woman is a reflection of the union between Christ and his Church. It is in the family that, from an early age, children are initiated to the presence of God and trust in his goodness as Father. A simple pedagogy of Christian prayer presupposes that adults give the example of personal prayer and the meditation of the word of God. It is therefore to support, help and preserve this primordial institution that the participants in the Synodal Assembly wished that family pastoral care be developed.
In this spirit, preparation for marriage is extremely important. To l their future responsibilities, the engaged couple must be able to find support from the local Church. In each parish, couples with experience, in conjunction with the clergy, can help young people prepare for marriage; already married people will be useful advisers; those with difficulties will be able to find the attentive listening and fraternal help they need. To animate marriage preparation and counseling centers, it is desirable that an Institute of Marriage and Family Studiesbe created to train priests and competent people. Such an institute will also provide documentation for the various centers, presenting the teaching of the Church which, in recent years, has offered many texts for the reflection of Christians.
It would be good to create a network of couples able to accompany those who are experiencing difficulties, to help them to take a different look at the problems encountered and to re-establish a serene dialogue between them. Reconciliations between couples will thus become possible, before coming too quickly to judicial solutions.
In view of the increasing difficulties of couples, ecclesiastical courts should work in coordination with the help centers, with a view to attempting to reconcile the spouses. As each Patriarchal Church has its own courts, close collaboration between them is essential to ensure equal justice for all, through the diversity of the judiciary, and to prevent those who turn to the courts from manipulating the course. of justice by playing on differences between jurisdictions. This presupposes on the part of the judges a pastoral spirit and perfect integrity that should be guaranteed by the constant vigilance of the ecclesiastical hierarchy. The right to defense of needy persons should also be ensured, including by strengthening their legal assistance by waiving fees and making volunteer lawyers available to them.
Families must also be helped in the economic difficulties they face. In this area, I trust the various local Catholic institutions to be inventive, to associate with each other and to build support networks, in liaison with the national institutions whose mission is to promote a family policy, by protecting every Member State and promoting the education of young people.
The women
Women deserve special attention, so that their dignity and their rights in different instances of social and national life are recognized. In fact, in its anthropology and in its doctrine, the Church affirms the equality of rights between man and woman, founded on the creation of every human being in the image of God. "The Church is proud, as you know, of having magnified and liberated woman, of having made her fundamental equality with man shine through the centuries in the diversity of characters". ATStarting from Christ and the mystery of the Incarnation, the role of the woman is admirably expressed by the Virgin Mary, whose oriental tradition has often emphasized the unique place, because she is the one by whom "we are given the 'tree of immortality'. Rightly and truly, we call holy Mary Mother of God, because this name contains all the mystery of salvation.
"The moral strength of the woman, her spiritual strength, joins the consciousness of the fact that God entrusts to him the man, the human being, in a specific way. Of course, God entrusts every man to everyone. However, this concerns the woman in a specific way - precisely because of her femininity - and this in particular determines her vocation". Women are acutely aware of what is entrusted to them and they have the capacity to manifest their "genius" in the most diverse circumstances of human life.
However, we must recognize that, in society and in local Catholic institutions, the place of women is often not commensurate with their commitments and efforts. First of all, we must remember that the Eastern tradition places a woman, Mary Magdalene, at an important place beside the Apostles, because, after following Jesus, she was the first to go to the tomb, to welcome the Good News of the Resurrection and to announce it to the disciples. It is therefore necessary to offer women greater shareholdings and responsibilities in life and ecclesial decisions, and to give them the opportunity to acquire the necessary training. Their role in the education of youth, particularly in the catechetical, spiritual, moral and emotional fields, is of prime importance because "the soul of the child is a city, a newly founded city and organized ", which requires patience and constant attention. They have also played and still play a determining role in ecclesial life and in Lebanese society, demonstrating that self-giving for love belongs to the true nature of the human person. During the war years, they were especially dedicated to saving life and maintaining the hope of peace. As I recently recalled, they are also intended to be peace educators, "in the relations between people and between generations, in the family, in the cultural, social and political life of nations". They are particularly active in health services, social services and education. I rejoice that the Fathers of the Synod wanted to give them the opportunity to be more active in the various ecclesial structures of parishes, eparchies and patriarchal and inter-patriarchal bodies, in the spiritual, intellectual, educational, humanitarian, social, administrative. They can do great service by their specific personal qualities.
Young people
Young Lebanese are "disappointed by the generation that preceded them and did not allow them to experience peace, but war and hatred". During the Synodal Assembly, they spoke to the Fathers of their criticisms and demands with frankness and courage, demonstrating that they were waiting for decisive changes in the Church. They called for concerted actions in the name of the Gospel and expressed their suffering before the ecclesial divisions that hinder the mission. They want a Church that shows unity in diversity, a place of fraternal life, sharing, healing and hope.
In the consciousness of the Lebanese nation and within the Church in Lebanon, young people must have an important place and be a force of national and ecclesial renewal, participating in the different structures of social life and decision-making bodies. They must be helped to overcome the temptations of extremism and laxity that may be watching them, and to refuse the different forms of life that are opposed to a healthy morality. On the other hand, it is advisable to enlighten them on the principles and the values ​​of the personal and social life. They will thus become full partners, anxious to pursue tirelessly the dialogue with their brothers who wish to reach compromises so that conviviality is possible, but without this leading to concessions on principles and values.
The Church relies on young people to give new impetus to ecclesial life and social life. The Christian communities are therefore invited to integrate them more in all their activities, so that they are actors of the "new evangelization", sowers of the Word with other young people, bringing their particular dynamism in view of the ecclesial renewal. Likewise, they are called to be full partners in the building of society. For this, it is necessary to give them a solid intellectual and spiritual formationwhich responds to their thirst for absolute and truth. Where they engage, they must be able to find the spiritual accompaniment they need. The role of religious counselors, in movements and on university campuses, whether priests, deacons, religious, religious or laity, is of great importance for their growth and human and spiritual maturation, in order to help them discern their vocation and find their place in society.
Religious and religious
Today, men and women religious are present in all areas of the Church and society. They are therefore well placed to continue to be a point of reference for their brethren, by closely configuring their lives to Christ and deepening their specific charism, for the good of the whole Church and for the salvation of the world. For this purpose, those who engage in the consecrated life are asked to attach themselves to a deep experience of God, to show that the Lord is the end of history and that he loves the world. Indeed, "thanks to the profession of the evangelical counsels, the characteristic traits of Jesus - chaste, poor and obedient - become" visible "in the middle of the world in an exemplary and permanent way and the eyes of the faithful are called to return to the mystery of the Kingdom of God, which is already acting in history, but waiting to take its full dimension in heaven".
Religious men and women in Lebanon and throughout the Middle East are invited to truly analyze their ways of life and their ways of witnessing the gospel and ling the missions entrusted to them. They will thus ensure that they remain faithful to the original intuitions of their founders and that they remain for the men of their time witnesses of Christ and examples of Christian life, community life and the practice of advice. evangelicals of poverty, chastity and obedience. The Lord commands us, indeed, to heal those who stumble and to aim first the profit of the neighbor before what pleases us. On the other hand, their mission requires a great fidelity to the ideal of all consecrated life and to the own orientation of the founders, as well as a creative spirit to meet the expectations of the men and to face the specific needs of the Church.
By vocation, consecrated persons proclaim the Gospel and testify to the primacy of the Absolute over all human realities, by word and by their exemplary life, because they belong to the Lord. As a result, their relationship with God is accompanied by moral behavior in harmony with the commitment made, because it is in "living in virtue that we are connected to God" and we walk in the path of divine sonship. All virtuous people, especially those who are consecrated, give an oblique dimension to their lives, reflect the glory of God and make the profound and true meaning of existence triumph. In a world that is turning more and more towards materialism and many idols, this is all the more urgent. That the testimony of the consecrated persons is credible, because "the contemporary man listens more willingly to the witnesses than the masters"; because, by their way of being and fidelity to their promises, they show the way of happiness and are recognized as true spiritual guides which the people need, on the model of Saint Anthony, the father of the monks.
Religious life is based on double fidelity to Christ and his Church. Its renewal requires the attention to the Gospel, the love of the Church and the development of the charism of each Institute. Young people are looking for ways to respond to the Lord's call. Institutes and pastors, therefore, together in close collaboration, are concerned with the promotion and discernment of vocations, to guide young people where God really calls them, without wishing to divert them from their free commitment to a spirituality. to provide them with the necessary training, taking into account the Lebanese socio-cultural context.
It is very important, for theological and pastoral reasons, that religious men and women are indeed well integrated into ecclesial life. They will thus set an example to all their brothers of the necessary unity between spiritual and charitable life. While they enjoy a fair autonomy in the internal affairs of their Institutes, they are an integral part of the particular Church and their action can only be carried out in harmony and in close collaboration with the whole of the Church. Church, in an ever more confident communion with "the Roman Pontiff as supreme superior of all religious" and with the bishops and in obedience to them; such a need is even more imperative when it comes to an activity related to pastoral life in one way or another. Indeed, the mission of the Church, Body of Christ, rests on the successors of the Apostles, by the very will of the Lord.
In many cases, taking a new awareness of the concept of religious life as presented here, religious men and women of Lebanon will feel the need for a reform, sometimes profound, of their ways of life and to express the following Christi, in accordance with the decree of the Second Vatican Council Perfectæ caritatison the renovation and adaptation of religious life. This reform will have to concern especially the new members of the Institutes, to which will be proposed, with the support of the authentic example of their trainers, a conception of the consecrated life which commits them to answer the call of the Lord in the Church of consistent and credible way. For their training, should be to appeal to religious and religious that give testimony of personal holiness, depth of the inner life of joyful fidelity to their v œ ux. Beginning with the youngest members, such a reform may gradually transform the life of the entire religious community and will be a significant contribution to the transformation of social life; for, as Saint Basil so affectionately wrote to his monks that he invited the evangelical counsels to perfection, it is a moral life and an ascetic life in keeping with the commitment made to bring about reconciliation between persons.
The apostolic religious life
Religious communities are a great wealth and a source of grace and dynamism for dioceses. Through their various apostolic activities, they participate in the pastoral approach desired by the bishops and, as a result, are integrated in the various diocesan bodies. I thank God for what they accomplished during the painful years of the war, in the health, education and social services, sometimes at the risk of the lives of their members. I thank the Lord for what they continue to do with dedication and selflessness, without neglecting their heavy duties and their small numbers. With the concern for unity in diversity, which has been one of the guidelines of the Special Assembly, religious men and women are invited to work in close collaboration, showing the complementarity of charisms. In this spirit, they will have to be attentive to a good distribution of people and institutions according to the pastoral priorities, in a total availability at the service of the Lebanese people andthe universal mission of the Church, beyond the borders of the country. This opening will give a new impetus to the apostolic religious life in Lebanon and will provoke new vocations. It is fitting that all who are engaged in the apostolic life "find a just and fruitful balance between action and contemplation, between prayer and charity, between commitment to history and eschatological expectation".
In particular, the visible presence of the Church is required of those in need. Religious men and women are called to witness to Christ's preferential love for the poor through their diversified services and through their lives of poverty and fraternal communion. It is also desirable for religious institutes to strengthen their presence and mission in the most remote and rugged areas of the country, helping everyone to stay in the land of their ancestors, to care for and live decently there.
In institutions for which religious men and women are responsible, lay people often do a great deal of work. Their place must be fully recognized, including by giving them positions of responsibility based on their skills.
Monastic life
Monasticism was "not considered in the East only as a separate condition, specific to a category of Christians, but more particularly, as a point of reference for all the baptized, according to the gifts offered to each by the Lord, presenting himself as an iconic synthesis of Christianity". Paradoxically, in the East, the apostolic religious life is currently much more developed than the monastic life in its different expressions, from strict cenobitism, as conceived by Pacôme or Basil, to the more rigorous eremitism of an Antoine or a Macarius. the Egyptian, which are nevertheless closely linked to the traditions of the Christian East. In its traditional form, "Eastern monasticism favors conversion, renouncing oneself and compunction of c œ ur, looking for the hesychia, that is to say, inner peace, and continual prayer, fasting and vigils, spiritual struggle and silence, paschal joy in the presence of the Lord and in the expectation of his definitive coming, the offering of oneself and one's own property, lived in the holy communion of the monastery or in hermitical solitude".
With the Synod Fathers, I wish the monastic life to return to the proper place; and I am pleased to note that there is today in some religious orders a sincere desire to reconnect with these authentic traditions and to return to traditional monastic values, thus reminding all men of the importance of prayer, liturgy, lectio divina, asceticism, service and community life. These elements are often called by the Fathers of the East "powerful spiritual weapons", indispensable in the fight for perfection. The monastic life is at the same time a path of personal sanctification and, following the example of the Apostle, a contribution to the sanctification of the people of God and of all men, by completing "in [his] flesh what is the trials of Christ for his Body, which is the Church ". Thus, through its prayerful life, the Church spreads germs of perfection and supports those who work in the field of the world, because the proximity of God makes discover the truth and the beauty of the divine mysteries and renders solidarity with its brothers.
I invite the Eastern Churches to draw on the sources of ancient monasticism, to rediscover the spiritual fervor of their origins, which is an important part of their treasures and traditions. They will again propose to men and women monastic life as one of the eminent forms of Christian life, to watch over their soul and to form their inner being. This will reign on all the people, to encourage their fellow Christians to "engage ardently in the internal struggle" and to witness in an exemplary way the greatness of fraternal life, thus inviting Christians and all men of good will to live new forms of human relations, based on charity and love.
Monasteries may become prophetic places in which "creation becomes praise of God and the commandment of charity concretely lived becomes an ideal of human coexistence, within which human being seeks God without barrier or obstacle, becoming a reference for all, carrying them in his heart and helping them to seek God". They will demonstrate that prayer is one of the major responsibilities of monks and all Christians. By total renunciation of themselves, they will be witnesses of the invisible and of what is essential in existence. "To renounce oneself, consider that it is this: to abandon oneself in everything to fraternity, to follow in no way one's own will, to possess nothing but the only clothing, so as to be free from all sides, to to attach oneself joyfully to that alone which has been ordained, taking into consideration all the brethren".
It is desirable that the monastic communities have their place in the Church in Lebanon, to make shine the glorious tradition of the Fathers, to share the treasures of grace that have been common to the ancient Churches, to give back to the whole Church today a testimony deeply rooted in the Christian East, in a way the high place from which it can be contemplated in all its beauty.
To the extent that community life, which makes ecclesial communion visible, will become flourishing and prophetic, we also hope for a new development of ascetic life and eremitic experience. The monks will be, as they once were, guides and spiritual masters, and their monasteries ecumenical and interreligious meeting places.
Ordained ministries
"In the service of the universal priesthood of the New Covenant, Jesus [...] calls and institutes the Twelve" to be his companions and to send them to preach, with the power to cast out demons". "In their turn, the Apostles, instituted by the Lord, will progressively l their mission by calling, in various but ultimately convergent forms, other men, as bishops, priests and deacons, to l the mission received from Christ. resurrected who sent them to all men of all times. [...] In the Church and for the Church, the priests sacramentally represent Jesus Christ, Head and Shepherd, they authentically proclaim the word, they repeat their gestures of forgiveness and offer of salvation, especially by Baptism, Penance and the Eucharist, until [...] the total gift of oneself, for the flock that they gather in unity and lead to the Father through Christ in the Spirit ".
"Inasmuch as he represents Christ Head, Shepherd and Bridegroom of the Church, the priest is placed not only in the Church but also in the Church. The priesthood, at the same time as the word of God and the sacramental signs of which he is the servant, belongs to the constituent elements of the Church. The ministry of the priest is entirely in the service of the Church to promote the exercise of the common priesthood of all the people of God; it is ordained not only to the particular Church, but also to the universal Church, in communion with the bishop, with Peter, and under the authority of Peter".
These few texts of the Magisterium on the ordained ministry must enlighten all the pastors in their episcopal, presbyteral or diaconal mission. The patriarchs, the bishops with the priests and the deacons, all participate in the unique mission of Christ. In order for the ecclesial diversity in Lebanon to be perceived by the faithful as a true wealth, the unity of the mission entrusted to all these pastors must become visible. No minister can ignore the other ministers who work on the same ground, whether they belong to his patriarchal church or to another. The witness of unity and fraternity through the close collaboration of pastors of various particular Churches is in Lebanon an urgent necessity. Many things are already happening,
The ordained ministries, in their variety, are there to edify the Church and maintain its unity both within the clergy and between it and the whole Christian people, to form a single body. Indeed, the Church is an organic body and, to the extent that each ls his role in harmony with others, the whole body will be healthy.
The episcopate
The patriarch is the head and father of his patriarchal Church; he is, with the Synod of Bishops, responsible for his life and renewal. As successor to the Apostles, the bishop exercises "the functions of teaching, sanctification, and government"; with his clergy he leads the people entrusted to him on the path of God. I join the members of the Synodal Assembly in exhorting the patriarchs and bishops of Lebanon to examine their conscience in truth and to renew their commitment to the path of personal conversion necessary for a more fruitful witness and the sanctification of the people. faithful: first by their life of prayer, self-denial, sacrifice and listening; then by their exemplary life of apostles and pastors, made of simplicity, poverty and humility; Finally, by their constant desire to defend truth, justice, m œ hearts and cause of low.
In their ministry, the bishops are first concerned with their immediate collaborators, the priests. They have to discern the vocation of the candidates to the priesthoodto accompany them, spiritually and materially, and, finally, to ensure their human, theological and pastoral formation, which will have to be daily more carefully, to meet the expectations of the faithful and the complexity of the problems of our time. If candidates for the priesthood who are already married or who wish to marry do not return to a seminary, it is essential to provide them with an appropriate human and spiritual framework during their training time, which should be of a high standard and similar to that of the other candidates, so that they can truly l their ministry in the current spiritual and cultural conditions. The desire for common training timesfor the candidates to the priesthood, the men and women religious and the laity were expressed by the Synod Fathers, as well as the possibility for the seminarians of the different liturgical traditions to live in common for at least part of their period of formation, in the purpose of creating friendships and engaging subsequent pastoral collaborations.
Then, with regard to the priests, single or married, the bishop must be close to them, take care to develop with them a fraternal and trustful collaboration, and to provide a serious permanent formation for their resourcing spiritual and for their pastoral action. It must also guarantee their material security within the framework of an institutionalized ecclesial solidarity, which responds to their personal and pastoral needs. This is especially important for married priests who have a dependent family. Bishops are also asked to give special attention to sick, elderly or troubled priests. Concerning married priests, it is necessary to envisage for their wives an adapted religious and pastoral formation. Finally, a fraternal collaboration between the bishops of different eparchies is necessary for a distribution of priests that corresponds to the needs of the faithful, avoiding too much concentration in the cities and their suburbs.
Presbyterate
Through sacramental life, regular prayer and lectio divina, priests will strengthen their spiritual life, which will produce fruit in their ministry in the service of the people of God. They should be attentive to the teaching function, especially in the homilies in which the word of God is to be explained and updated, to help the faithful to approach the Christian mystery and live evangelical values ​​every day.
Frequently, given the territorial overlap of the different eparchies, priests, who come under various jurisdictions, exercise their ministry in the same territory. Collaboration and coordination of their apostolate require regular meetings and real cooperation. They also have to develop their spirit of collaboration with the faithful. "Sacred pastors know very well what important contribution lay people make to the good of the whole Church. They know that they were not instituted by Christ to assume aloneall the salvific mission of the Church to the world, but that their eminent task is to be pastors of the faithful of Christ and to recognize their services and charisms so that all, each in his own way, cooperate unanimously in the common work".
Priests also care about their ongoing formation through reading and meetings. I encourage them in this way; I also invite bishops, in collaboration with people prepared for this purpose, to organize and develop theological and pastoral teaching programs that enrich priests in their service to the faithful.
With regard to ecumenical dialogue, priests have a privileged place because they have frequent relations with pastors of other Churches and Ecclesial Communities. Their ecumenical openness and their capacity for collaboration and dialogue, without confusion and with respect for the people, will help the faithful in turn to establish warm relations with their brethren, who will further the cause of unity among the churches.
When the parish is in an area where Muslims also live, the fraternal attitude of openness and mutual help of priests will indicate to the faithful the path of a successful conviviality, in keeping with Lebanon's own vocation.
These concerns, which are important in a priestly life, make it clear that candidates for the priesthood must receive not only a good intellectual, theological, biblical and spiritual formation, but also a human formation which helps them to acquire a personal maturity and which makes them attentive to the cultural complexity in which they will have to exercise their ministry.
The diaconate
The Second Vatican Ecumenical Council has put into effect the permanent diaconal ministry, which the Eastern tradition has always preserved. Deacons represent Christ as a servant, especially in the service of the poor, the word of God and the liturgy. As a result, this ordained ministry is to be upgraded. Candidates should be provided with appropriate training and adequate livelihoods according to their personal situation.
The renewal of communion structures
É difier together the Body of Christ
The courageous renewal desired by the Synod Fathers will imply on everyone's part a real openness of mind and heart.ur, to develop coordination and collaboration among all Catholics. No one can claim to be the exclusive owner of the mission, but all must let Christ act through them so that there are no obstacles to the gifts and charisms of the various members of the Catholic Church. This requires, among all the ecclesiastical authorities, a network of communications that is all the more indispensable because, in Lebanon, there are different Catholic eparchies and therefore different jurisdictions. This difficulty can be a grace: it pushes the leaders to consult each other, with respect for diversity and specific jurisdictions: it also invites them to build together the Body of Christ, having a real ecclesial meaning, without claiming for themselves or for their own confessional community the privilege of the mission on a given territory, while being submitted to Christ, who is the Sovereign Priest. Every person or ecclesial body that does not seek collaboration becomes impoverished and becomes like a dead branch that prevents the Spirit's life from circulating throughout the Catholic Church in Lebanon.
The parishes
Catholics often do not feel part of the parish community in their place of residence. Some remain attached to the parish of their place of birth, even if they do not actually have any contact. Forced displacement, during the war, also created ambiguous situations: the faithful feel divided between the place where they found refuge and their place of origin. In the cities, the meaning of the parish community is diminishing more and more. The faithful are content to go to Mass in the nearest church, without realizing that participating in the Holy Mysteries also means belonging to a Body, because the Eucharist builds the Church, unites the Church of Heaven and of the earth, is the sign of unity and charity. The spiritual bonds created by listening to the Word and by communion in the same Bread bear fruit of peace and solidarity in human relationships. However, many devotees have come to an individualistic conception of the Christian faith without active participation in the life of the local Church. The priest then risks becoming the one who ensures the celebration of the sacraments and who performs the necessary formalities at the time of baptism, marriage or death, whereas he is above all the one who animates the Christian community, in liaison with the deacons and competent lay people. The pastor must be concerned for the whole flock, without neglecting the weaker members, those who often do not attend church, those who are marginalized from society, and those who are sick and in need of care. 'to bevisited at home. I gladly urge pastors to visit the faithful entrusted to them to be close to them, thus strengthening the bonds between all the members of the parish community, to accompany them in their spiritual life and to support them in the trials.
Parishes are the basic cells of the ecclesial body. They are portions of the people of God who, "in a way, represent the visible Church established in the whole world"; they are a privileged place of community apostolate, because they bring together in themselves many human diversities, without distinction of age or social rank, to integrate them into the universal Church. By sacramental practice, especially by the Eucharist and by penance, the faithful are strengthened for the mission entrusted to them in the world, especially the religious education of the young and the testimony. In this spirit, it will be useful to help Christians to deepen theCatechism of the Catholic Church, which presents "faithfully and organically the teaching of the Holy Scripture, of the living Tradition in the Church and of the authentic Magisterium, as well as the spiritual inheritance of the Fathers, of the saints and of the saints of the Church, to allow to better know the Christian mystery and to revive the faith of the people of God". This teaching must be accompanied by a permanent and conscious effort to have to translate the Christian dogma and the directives of the Magisterium according to the determined situations, in a specific culture, "by a concrete and faithful application, at the level of each Church. and the whole Church. We must constantly return to this source" and to this pastoral reference that is the Council, associating it with its own spiritual and liturgical sources, so that the liturgy is really a confession of faith received from the Apostles.
That is why, with their pastors, I encourage the Catholic faithful to deepen their faith, through study, reading the Bible as a family, participating in Bible groups, sharing and evangelical vigils. in parishes, schools, universities and ecclesial movements. I ask that spiritual retreats, based on the Word of God and on Christian dogma, be proposed for young people and adults. Indeed, most of the faithful acquire in technical and scientific fields of knowledge more and more advanced. Their knowledge of the Christian mystery must be able to grow similarly, so that their spiritual life illuminates their daily life. In modern Lebanon, it is important that culture is first and foremost nourished by the Word of God and deep faith, to inspire Christian reflection on the fundamental problems facing man and society. Thus, the lay faithful will discover that their participation in the life of the Church is essential at the level of parishes, movements or the eparchy, especially in decision-making bodies such as the pastoral council of the eparchy and the councils. parishes.
When several parishes coexist on the same territory, while preserving their own identity and independence, they are called to collaborate closely, which will be an eloquent sign of the unity of the Church in an inventive communion and in the legitimate respect for diversity, especially within inter-ritual parish councils. On the other hand, there is not always the possibility of having permanent priests for each parish of each patriarchal church. Depending on concrete pastoral needs, a priest may be asked to celebrate the sacraments in a different liturgical tradition than his own, provided he has been properly prepared and received permission from the competent authorities.
Small parish communities may also find it very difficult to build their own church, while there is already one or more dependent on another eparchy in the area. During the war, when necessities imposed it, churches were put at the disposal of the faithful of different liturgical traditions. Such hospitality could today be extended wherever it seems desirable, thus giving witness to a love "in deeds and in truth".
To promote the sharing of human and spiritual wealth between parish communities and so that the faithful do not feel divided between their parish membership and their commitment to the brothers in their neighborhood, it is also desirable to consider, where possible, interparliamentary associations. They would promote dialogue, consultation, collaboration, mutual aid material, spiritual and pastoral. In this way, a spirit of communion would develop among the faithful of different traditions, the community spirit of which would be part of the Lebanese soul.
Within the same eparchy, it is also important to promote collaboration between parishes, by making lay people attentive to the different aspects of diocesan and universal ecclesial life, through information and the invitation to a commitment. concrete Christian. This will happen to the extent that the priests themselves will know each other and meet. It is therefore hoped that pastors live in their parishes in close contact with their confreres in the same sector and in good relationship with deacons and other pastoral agents (religious, religious or lay), while respecting their fidelity to their ecclesial membership. respectively. These fraternal relations can also extendpastors of other churches and ecclesial communities, in a spirit of ecumenical openness. Thus, will be truly given visible signs of unity among the various ecclesial communities, unity to which the young Lebanese Christians legitimately aspire.
The eparchies
"The eparchy is a portion of the people of God entrusted to a bishop to lead with the collaboration of his presbyterium, so that, adhering to his pastor and gathered by him in the Spirit through to the Gospel and to the Eucharist, it constitutes a particular Church in which the Church of Christ, one, holy, catholic and apostolic, resides and truly acts". It is made up of a set of parishes, so it makes sense that the parish issues are similar to those found at this level. Several bishops of different sui juris churches have jurisdiction over the same territory, which also requires a spirit of consultation, coordination and cooperation. For the pastoral good of the people of God, consideration should be given to reorganizing the geographical distribution of eparchies, according to need and, as far as possible, in harmony with administrative divisions, for the sake of efficiency and better coordination of pastoral service.
In the practical field, I make the wish of the synod fathers that the curies of eparchies and patriarchies are properly organized and well equipped. Those who are called to work there, priests, deacons or laity, will have to remember that their function is a mission of Church and a service of the Christian people, and that, as good servants, they will have to be careful not to deviate from the spiritual and moral rectitude, and not to use their function for political or personal or family Curies will also find ways to collaborate, to better serve the Church in Lebanon. In this spirit, it would be good for the priests, and especially the diocesan priests, to be closely associated with their bishop, because they are "the prudent co-operators of the episcopal order" and their reports are "based on the links of the supernatural charity". This fraternal charity and this collaboration will be particularly visible and effective in the presbyteral council that every eparchy must have.
The patriarchies
The patriarchal Churches represent for the universal Church and for the Church in Lebanon an undeniable wealth, because of the very ancient specific traditions - liturgical, theological and spiritual - already present from the first Ecumenical Councils and during the first millennium of Christianity. These traditions are largely shared by the Orthodox Churches. The Church wanted by Christ is a mystery of unity in diversity, the sacrament of Communion (Koinônia ) whose holy Trinity is the source, the model and the end. At the level of a patriarchal Church, this communion manifests itself above all in episcopal collegiality, implying the co-responsibility actually achieved in the synod of bishops of the patriarchal Church. It is visible also thanks to a frank collaboration between all the members of the patriarchal Church. For this cooperation in pastoral service to be effective, I ask the patriarchs and synod of bishops of each patriarchate to study the possibility of setting up a pastoral council at the level of the patriarchal curia and to consider the reorganization of the curiae in each patriarchate. and in each eparchy. The communion is also expressed by the links between the patriarchal Churches and the whole Church, which are now regulated by the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, because all "were also entrusted to the pastoral government of the Sovereign Pontiff".
Since 1990, the new Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches has been promulgated, expressing the solicitude of the Holy See for the patriarchal Churches and its concern to highlight the Eastern Catholic traditions, in the tranquillitas ordinis," assigning the primacy to love, grace and charisma "and making" the organic development of ecclesial society and of all the people who are part of it "easier to achieve". It is therefore important that this Code be applied with serenity, in a spirit of fairness and justice to all the faithful placed under the various patriarchal jurisdictions. It is first of all up to the patriarchs, to the Assembly of Catholic Patriarchs and Bishops in Lebanon, to the synods of the bishops of the patriarchal Churches and to each bishop, to ensure the proper administration of justice. I also ask all those who work in the courts to strive to carry out their ecclesial mission in the respect of the moral values ​​proper to their functions and with perfect integrity, taking care to serve the Church. It will be a testament to the Church's love for its members and an important element of the credibility of the local churches, as justice and charity go hand in hand.
Invitation to pastoral renewal
Catechesis
Resuming the pastoral urgencies emphasized by the Synod Fathers, I firstly encourage pastors and the faithful to give full attention to the development of catechesis. "The specific purpose of catechesis [is] to develop, with the help of God, an initial faith, to fully promote and nourish daily the Christian life of the faithful of all ages". Thus, there is a catechesis adapted to each age of life, to each social category of the faithful, to those who have moved away from the Church and the faith and who wish to return to it, so that everyone can hear the wonders published. God in their language and to witness its culture. While transmitting knowledge, catechesis is essentially intended to "put someone not only in contact but in communion, in intimacy with Jesus Christ: only he can lead to the Father's love in the Spirit and make us participate to the life of the Holy Trinity".
This is one of the first responsibilities of the Church, which requires the mobilization of all the faithful, each with their own gifts. The responsibility lies with each of the patriarchal Churches and their hierarchical bodies, in close cooperation with each other. Coordination is therefore essential and the Assembly of Catholic Patriarchs and Bishops in Lebanon (APECL), a collaborative body, can play a leading role.
Catechesis must first be concretely assured by the parents, within the family, because they are the first educators of their children. The school is also important, albeit limited; indeed, it can not ensure the integration of the young person into his own liturgical tradition, because the pupils who attend the schools belong more often to various particular Churches. The parishwill therefore be in charge of helping and assisting parents in religious education, fostering the integration of young people into the local Church and providing adults with adequate catechesis. I therefore invite parents and pastors to l this mission of teaching the faith with great care, because what is sown in childhood bears fruit throughout life. It is in this spirit that the Catholic hierarchy in Lebanon wished that the solemn communion, still practiced in several Catholic schools, should rather be celebrated in the parishes. Christian youth and adult movements and Christian training centers can also provide valuable assistance to the catechetical process.
Because of their conjugal and family vocation, parents have to exercise their responsibility as educators of faith, prayer and the human, moral and social virtues of their children. This education begins from the youngest age of children; it is already accomplished when the members of a family help each other to grow in faith and in the respect of the essential human values, thanks to their humble, silent and persevering testimony of Christian life, lived daily according to the Gospel. In addition, parents will be keen to continue in the family setting, imbued with love and respect, the more methodical training received elsewhere. This will mark the children in a decisive way. The parents themselves will benefit from this for their personal lives and for deepening their bonds of trust with their children. But, so that they can respond to their vocation as parents, they have the right to be helped by parish or eparchial institutions that give them the necessary training in an appropriate setting.
In Catholic schools, catechesis needs well articulated programs, inspired by the Catechism of the Catholic Church, rooted in the particular traditions of the Eastern Churches, open to the ecumenical dimension and responding to the specific needs of young people. the peoplewho are in charge of catechesis receive an important mission from the Church. They will be carefully selected and trained appropriately, to accompany young people in their human and spiritual growth, with patience, pedagogy and concern to transmit the Christian message and help them to find answers to their fundamental questions about the meaning itself. of their existence. The catechist is more than a teacher: he is a witness of the faith of the Church and an example of a moral life. He leads each young person to discover Christ and directs him to his parish so that he can take root in the local Church.
During the formative years, the school is also a believing community, which allows youth and educators to experience communion among the different patriarchal Churches, thus giving them the desire to participate in a Christian community throughout their lifetime. life. The links between parishes and schools will encourage the integration of young people in parish life, without undermining the Christian dynamism of schools, because there is an obvious complementarity between ecclesial sites. Those who are in charge of the direction of the Catholic schools will take care to develop in the educational community of their establishment a climate of faith and a sense of human and moral values, in the respect of those who do not share their beliefs and Christian culture, but without the Christian values ​​on which the education system is founded. They will therefore see to it that sufficient time is granted for catechesis to Catholic pupils, that suitable means be made available. In the same way, catechesis will be ensured in public and non-Catholic schools.
The parishes, for their part, will endeavor to develop the reception of young people, giving them the possibility of participating actively in the liturgy, the sacraments and parish activities, and providing them with the necessary means and premises in parish centers. Because young people need to meet and connect with each other, with priests and responsible adults. Priests also have a great responsibility in the field of adult catechesis, primarily through the Sunday homily.
Christian movements are a precious asset for the Catholic Church in Lebanon. Their members experience an authentic fraternal life and Christian life. In fact, while maintaining the specific and specific character of their movements, those in charge will constantly check that the ecclesial criteria of their lay associations are respected. They will ensure that their members receive a deep and permanent human and religious formation so that they develop their love for Christ and for the Church, and remain organically connected to their respective parishes, thus giving witness to a strong and strong communion in their conviction, as well as "a mutual esteem for all forms of apostolate in the Church". In a spirit of obedience to the patriarchs and bishops, movements should ensure that their activities are in harmony with the specific heritage of churches whose services they œ uvrent. The recognition of a movement by the Holy See is an invitation to participate in the life and mission of the Church, by engaging in human society and local pastoral life, but with respect for the Church. authority of pastors and in harmony with particular Churches and specific liturgical traditions, in a true missionary communion.
Institutes of Higher Education
Universities and Catholic institutes must ensure their specific identity, which is to guarantee a Christian presence in the academic world, promoting, in the light of the Catholic faith, a high-level academic reflection in the different disciplines of human knowledge, and a form of teaching that is based on Christian culture and on an integral vision of man in accordance with anthropological, moral and theological heritage of the Church. They must constantly be attentive to the essential characteristics of their catholicity: the Christian inspiration of the university community, a continual reflection on the treasures of human knowledge in the light of the Catholic faith, fidelity to the Magisterium and the commitment of the Catholic Church. institution in the service of the people of God and of all men. Religious institutes have accomplished and are doing quality work to develop a culture in harmony with faith and the Catholic University ls its role in the Church and in society, also promoting inter-faith dialogue. -cultural.
Different higher institutes in religious sciences and philosophy offer to the faithful an exegetical, theological, philosophical and spiritual formation, according to the teaching of the Magisterium of the Church. They make available to a large number of Christians disciplines that will allow them to grow their spiritual life, to give a deeper witness in everyday life and to have a level of religious studies that can be in harmony with their secular studies. Christians are thus invited to a true understanding of the faith, to a serious discovery of the word of God, to dogmatic truths and to many liturgical and spiritual traditions, as well as to the recognition of fundamental ethical principles.
The Church has always had the concern to participate in the human and professional training of young people, through quality university and technical education, to prepare them to exercise a profession, because work is one of the fundamental dimensions of the profession. human existence. At the same time, teaching helps to build the personality of young people and increase their culture, to make them discover a Christian way of living in the world, in work, in leisure and in everyday life, it is to develop in them a true spirituality of work. This will prepare them in a beneficial way to be witnesses of Christ by the example they will give and the values ​​they will transmit to those around them.
ATThrough the teaching of scientific and technical disciplines, the aim is to cultivate and promote in-depth scientific training and a taste for research, which make young people competent in their field; such an approach also makes it possible to propose a culture and a true Christian anthropology and a Christian way of life based on the essential values ​​and on the principles of the social doctrine of the Church. Vocational training and human work affect the different areas of life, the personal lives of workers, family life and social life. "The result of all this is that man binds his deepest human identity to belonging to his nation. Depending on their nature, status and specific objectives, Catholic higher education institutions "make their own contribution to the Church and to society, whether through research, education or vocational training".
The Ecclesiastical Faculty of Theology
For it to grow and strengthen, the Church must also pay attention to the renewal of the teaching of theology, philosophy and canon law, preparing the trainers and teachers - priests, deacons, religious, lay people - who will have to face the necessities of pastoral life. Without neglecting the heritage of the universal Church, the treasury of theology and spiritual traditions of the East must be constantly deepened. Research will not fail to affect ecumenical dialogue, especially with all churches of the Antiochian tradition, and relations with Islamic communities, whose spiritual heritage has also been enriched over the course of history..
To meet the demands of time, curricula must be renewed so as to give a privileged place to the study of Sacred Scripture, dogma and oriental traditions, without neglecting the other traditions. In particular, the Faculty of Theology will strive to develop a comprehensive approach to theology and a method of work that takes into account the heritage of the Eastern Churches, with special emphasis on the exchange and close relationship between the doctrine, the liturgy and spirituality that characterize Eastern Christianity. These programs will above all aim to give students a living knowledge, in prayer, of how to express the faith that belongs to their ecclesial identity. Firmly based on this heritage, they will be further enriched by knowledge of the heritage of Western Christianity. In this sense, I am delighted that Lebanese priests are also trained in ecclesiastical faculties outside Lebanon, so that the different Western and Eastern traditions can be interwoven. It is the confrontation between what they have acquired elsewhere and their own heritage that will make them valuable pastors for the patriarchies to which they belong, capable of providing studies and serious scientific publications.
In a spirit of service and openness, taking into account the complex realities of the Middle East, the faculty of theology has the mission to give dogmatic and exegetical education of quality, in fidelity to the different traditions and the Magisterium of the Church. From this point of view, it is a special responsibility of the teachers to l a specific ministry of the word of God, so that they will be masters of the faith for young people, for their other faithful witnesses of the living truth of the Gospel and models of fidelity to the Church". The function of theologian is exercised for the building of ecclesial communion and is an eminent service of the people of God. In addition, teachers must not neglect to prepare researchers who will continue the study of theology tomorrow, while remaining firmly attached to the revealed data and carrying out their research within the Church's faith; without altering the doctrine, they will have to take into account the evolution of cultures and mentalities to teach the faith, to transmit the evangelical truths in the present language, and thus to participate in the building up of the Church continually. On the other hand, thus creating the conditions for fruitful exchanges. This will help the necessary and salutary missionary openness, because any particular Church that folds back on itself no longer ls its mission.
The vocation ministry
With the Fathers of the Synod, I would like here to emphasize the need for a common pastoral ministry of vocations, to put the means of each patriarchal Church at the service of the whole Catholic Church in Lebanon. In this field, what would be done in the form of opposition or competition would be to the detriment of the dynamism of the whole ecclesial body. The work of discernment supposes on the part of the accompaniers and the trainers a great interior freedom allowing to help the young people to discover in which direction the Spirit pushes them. All partners in the pastoral life must join forces to help young people to freely discern the call they feel for serving the Church in the priesthood or the consecrated life for men and women. They should be eager to offer young people models of life that arouse the joy and desire to respond to their vocation in the priesthood,
I also invite all the faithful to send fervent prayers for vocations to the Lord, especially in the context of the World Week of Prayer for Vocations, so that the Lord sends workers to his harvest; it is also an excellent way of raising young people's awareness of the question of vocations, to make them hear the calls of the Church and to give them the necessary information on the different forms of commitment, with the conditions and stages of formation linked to it.
The communion
The Church, Body of Christ
After four years of prayer and preparation, during which the Catholic Church in Lebanon courageously reflected on its vocation and mission, the Special Assembly for Lebanon of the Synod of Bishops reminded it of the way forward. inviting all Catholics to conversion, "to find, translated into their language, the very words by which our Savior and Master Jesus Christ wanted to inaugurate his preaching:" Convert and believe in the Gospel", that is to say, welcome the joyful news of love, of your adoption as sons of God, and therefore of fraternity".
It is in Christ, their only hope, that the faithful and the clergy together form the Church, around the bishops; the first duty of pastors is to maintain the unity of the Church. Each local church manifests the mystery of this unity according to its own tradition. It is also from the crucified and risen Christ that she receives the communion of the Holy Spirit in which she must constantly be renewed. "Everyone has his own function, but all live in one life. Now, what the soul is to the body of man, the Holy Spirit is to the Body of Christ which is the Church; and the Holy Spirit operates throughout the Church what the soul operates in all the members of one body". But the fruits of renewal do not concern only the faithful; they must also appear in every patriarchal church as an institution and in communion among the different patriarchal Churches.
Also, in the third stage of its work, the Synodal Assembly reflected on this aspect of its theme: "Solidarity, we testify of his love". Throughout the Synodal Sessions, I have witnessed the solidarity of the Synod Fathers, "according to the truth and in love"; I ask the Lord that this experience of communion, fruit of the Synod, extend to all the people, so that the Catholic Church in Lebanon bears witness to the Love that unites all its members as brothers, a love to which all men aspire. To testify that God is Love is to prove it first "in act and in truth", because "by faith in him Christ increased our love for God and for our neighbor". The testimony of love among Catholics is one of the first requirements that flow from the love of God manifested in his Son. The testimony - martyrdom - which is the essential mission of the Church, "breaks the power of the Spirit", because it is the manifestation of the power of God in the world, despite the weakness of the 'man. In the effective communion of the different particular Churches between them, it will have all its value and its range.
Communion in the Catholic Church in Lebanon
In Liban
The Catholic Patriarchal Churches in Lebanon belong to the Catholic Church and, because they are in full communion with the Successor of Peter, they are also in communion with each other as "parts of the one Church of the Christ" and "as particular achievements of the one and only Church of Jesus Christ" from which they derive their ecclesiality. We must now ask ourselves in truth whether, in each place, they really live this full and trusting communion with the Apostolic See and between them, especially in areas where episcopal collegiality locally calls for effective co-responsibility. The bishops, clergy, religious, and lay faithful most committed to the mission are aware that there is still a long way to go, as expressed in many interventions and reports of intersections with lucidity and courage. But the future and renewal desired by the Synodal Assembly largely depend on the efforts of all members of the Catholic Church and their fraternal gestures. However, all must constantly remember that the most beautiful offering and "the greatest sacrifice that can be offered to the Lord is our peace, our fraternal concord, a people united in the unity of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit".
Starting from the Instrumentum laboris and in their dialogue with lay and priests, the Synod Fathers were able to identify the main causes of the profound harm suffered by the faithful in Lebanon: the absence of the sense of the Church as a mystery of communion which expresses the sacramental nature of the Church and the unity of the faithful in one body. All institutions and canon legislation express this mystery and invite all members of the people of God to a real fraternity. In this spirit, it is important that the sense of faith and of the Church continually prevail over the mentality of withdrawal into one's own confessional community, which manifests itself too often. This state of affairs calls for an evangelical conversion [ metanoiaconstant, to move from "the confessional mentality to a sense of authentic Church". It is therefore a radical reversal of perspective that is required, as Saint. Ignatius of Antioch already said: "Divisions, flee them as the principle of all evils". With the help of the Holy Spirit, pastors and faithful will have the spiritual audacity to go beyond the socio-cultural limits of their faith community, to place themselves at the level of the Church as a whole and to act according to all the ecclesial communion. the structuresalready exist, foreseen by the holy canons, but their dynamism is held back by various forms of personal or communal egoism, by difficulties of communication and collaboration, by the all-human desire to have a preponderant place; these are attitudes contrary to charity. Guidance has already been laid with regard to the parishes, eparchies, and synods of the bishops of the patriarchal churches. But it is important also to envisage transformations at the national level, with a view to the effective co-responsibility of the bishops and greater communion between the different local Churches.
In 1967, following the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, the Assembly of Catholic Patriarchs and Bishops in Lebanon (APECL) was created. This collegial structure does not replace the synods of the bishops of the various patriarchal Churches; each patriarchy retains its own authority with regard to its life and internal organization. However, the APECL is an obvious manifestation and a singular expression of the collegial spirit of the bishops, eager to remain faithful to their vocation of pastors, in a full and generous collaboration between them and with the Successor of Peter. According to its new statutes, the function of this assembly is to promote and intensify consultation and cooperation in all areas where this is possible. For this, it is called to constantly check the effectiveness of its mode of operation. In this perspective, the members of the Synodal Assembly having made many suggestions that I make mine, I invite the Catholic Church in Lebanon to take into account the following general orientations.
First of all, it is natural for each patriarchate and APECL to support the momentum and dynamism generated by the Synodal Assembly. They will disseminate the present Post-Synodal Exhortation to all the faithful, to be the subject of specific studies and to implement it in each patriarchal Church and in all the common structures.
As requested by the Synod Fathers, it is urgent that APECL develop an overall ministry in the areas in which the various Catholic Patriarchal Churches can jointly exercise their responsibilities and pastoral action. Such deliberate and carefully prepared consultation will lead to decisions of common interest that will lead APECL members to engage in pastoral action together, provided that these decisions do not conflict with each other. not to the essential tradition of this or that patriarchal Church. In the spirit of the renewals proposed above, it will be very beneficial for priests, deacons, religious and lay people to participate in APECL's activities; in particular, consideration should be given to setting up a pastoral council at APECL to involve all members of the people of God in the mission of the Church. It is up to pastors "to recognize and promote the dignity and responsibility of laity in the Church", who "have the faculty, and sometimes even the duty, to give their opinion regarding the good of the Church."
From a functional point of view, it is important that Commissions be reorganized to become more operational and to truly serve the mission of the Church. APECL is called upon to organize itself better and better in order to work for the common good of the members of the different particular Churches.
With the whole Catholic Church in the Middle East
During the Synodal Assembly, several interventions drew attention to the vocation and mission of the Catholic Church in Lebanon, and to the need to establish and strengthen fraternal bonds with Christians in the Near and South. in the Middle East, and especially with those who are sometimes ignored in Iran, Sudan and North Africa. This broadening of perspective and this concern for solidarity have greatly delighted me; I see a promising sign of renewal in an exchange of gifts between particular Churches. The Catholic Church in Lebanon, so privileged despite its sufferings, is invited to open up to her brothers and to respond joyfully to the vocation of any particular Church to create fraternal bonds, following the example of the first Christian community of Jerusalem. Several synod fathers, priests, religious, and lay faithful also proclaimed that one of the ways of the renewal of the Church in Lebanon will be its openness to the ad gentes mission to cooperate with other particular churches in Lebanon. worldwide. The outward missionary impulse can only renew the youth and vigor of the Church within.
In this spirit, the Council of Catholic Patriarchs of the East (CPCO), called to strengthen its structures, will effectively manifest the catholicity of the Church in the region and its mission of salvation for all its inhabitants. The CPCO has a role of regional coordination, giving in its way a testimony of the collegial spirit of the episcopate, with a view to common achievements in the apostolic and charitable fields. With the Catholic communities of the diaspora
An urgent appeal was made by several speakers to maintain and intensify relations between the Catholic communities of the diaspora and the various patriarchates in Lebanon. Indeed, a local community can not live cut off from its center of unity without running the risk of establishing itself in complete independence. This renewal of relationships involves duties on both sides. Thus, each patriarchy will take care to provide to its faithful spread throughout the world the spiritual and moral assistance they need, by sending priests, deacons, religious and nuns, who will take care to work in liaison with the other local Churches, in particular with that of Latin rite; at the same time, bishops will be careful that future priests, trained in the diaspora, can discover concretely the heritage and culture of their patriarchal Church of origin. These relationships will also be concretized by a permanent material and spiritual sharing, in order to support the whole ecclesial body.
With the whole Catholic Church
The Synodal Assembly has allowed a new Pentecost, which we must give thanks to the Lord. The Eastern Catholic Churches in full communion with the Church of Rome are a tangible manifestation of the maturity of ecclesial awareness. In fact, unity is a primordial characteristic of the Church and is required by its very nature. This concern for unity must not, however, weaken the specific heritage of the Eastern Catholic Churches, to which the faithful are invited to give "esteem and praise" because it is "the heritage of the whole Church of Christ". Particular traditions are also a privileged occasion to revive the dynamism and missionary impulse to which each faithful must participate. Pastors will take care to give all Catholics the necessary training, so that they acquire the missionary sense and help their Christian brothers and men in need.
IDialogue with the Orthodox Churches
The Special Assembly for Lebanon of the Synod of Bishops was also a time of grace, a kairos, because of the active participation of the fraternal delegates of the Orthodox Churches in Lebanon, coming from the Greek Orthodox and Syriac-Orthodox Patriarchate. Antioch, the Armenian Catholicosate of Cilicia and the Assyrian Church of the East. Their interventions in plenary sessions and in the intersections, as well as during friendly meetings, helped to develop a fraternal atmosphere between the different Churches. I thank them for their fraternal participation and for their contribution to dialogue. Indeed, it is now clear that careful studies have dispelled many misconceptions about most traditional Christological disputes arising at the V thcentury. The Catholic Church and the Orthodox Churches in Lebanon are therefore called, in a special way, to "keep in a communion of faith and charity those family ties which ought to thrive between local Churches, as between s œ urs".
Much progress has been made since the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council. With the whole Catholic Church, I welcome the ecumenical commitment of each of the churches, the fruitful dialogues between them and the various theological agreements that have been signed. This undoubtedly allowed for the serenity and trust of the problems which still hinder the full communion in charity between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Churches, and to envisage elements of solution, with a view to the truth.
The first orientation proposed is to rediscover and deepen the Antiochian tradition that is common to a number of Catholic Patriarchal Churches and Orthodox Churches in the Middle East. This return to the sources calls for a renewal in theological formation and reflection, in the spiritual life and in the pastoral action, taking into account the Tradition of the Church, especially the Fathers of East and West who have expressed the Gospel message in their various cultures. I invite all the faithful of Christ to a fervent prayer so that we can do the will of the Lord, to a life of faith and ever more intense charity, to a true sharing of gifts and the serious discovery of the spiritual views of their brothers. It is certainly in this line that theological and pastoral training organizations can make an important contribution to ecumenical dialogue.
During the discussions, the Synodal Assembly spoke extensively three pastoral problems, sources of difficulty in relationships between the patriarchal Catholic Churches and the Orthodox Churches, which have yet to be seriously studied in agreement with the Holy See. I welcome the concrete efforts made and the collaborations carried out in various fields, which will have to be pursued and deepened, with the aim of making the truth and the dialogue of charity triumph. Pastoral opportunities are offered to the pastors of the Catholic Church, respecting traditions and sensibilities, while ensuring a fair exposition of Catholic doctrine. They must be used by taking care to move forward in relation and in harmony with the conversations that the Holy See is pursuing with the various Churches and to give the faithful the necessary formation.
Links with Ecclesial Communities from the Reformation
The participation of the fraternal delegate of the evangelical communities in Lebanon was greeted with joy and was an opportunity to dispel some misunderstandings about Protestant communities. The essential link between the Catholic Church and the Reformed communities rests on baptism, which makes us sons of God, as well as listening to the Word of God. At the same time, we are aware of what separates us, especially with regard to ministries and the sacramentality of the Church. Through fraternal dialogue and prayer, we can gradually move from mistrust to commitments on the path of reconciliation and full unity, translated in particular by common social actions that highlight the face of Christ the servant of all. men.
The Council of Churches in the Middle East
In Lebanon, the Council of Churches in the Middle East (CEMO) has become one of the usual frameworks for ecumenical dialogue. It is in this context that a common reflection on issues such as the date of the Lord's Passover celebration and the study of a common Arabic text of the Lord's Prayer and the Creed could be initiated.that it will be necessary, however, to submit to the competent authorities. In the humanitarian field, a common witness can be rendered to show our contemporaries the tenderness and solicitude of the Lord. The service of Christian unity requires competence and specialized training, and can not be realized without the participation at the highest level of the heads of the churches concerned. Indeed, ecumenical approaches involve not only the local Church but also the whole Church and all the churches. I therefore urge pastors and the faithful to keep alive the desire for unity, and, without tiring, by an ecumenical dialogue of proximity, to contribute to changing mentalities, praying together and acting together whenever this is possible.
In a spirit of concord and fraternity, it is worth mentioning also the relations that the CEMO is committed to developing and strengthening with the different Muslim communities, in order to envisage possible collaborations to serve the Lebanese society together.
The Catholic Church in Lebanon engaged in interreligious dialogue
A real dialogue
A true dialogue between believers of the great monotheistic religions is based on mutual esteem, in order to protect and promote together, for all men, social justice, moral values, peace and freedom. This common task is particularly urgent for the Lebanese, courageously called to forgive one another, to silence their dissensions and enmities, and to change their mentalities, in order to develop brotherhood and solidarity for the reconstruction of a country. always more friendly society.
Participating in the transformation of the world requires above all the conversion of hearts and the struggle for justice, charity and fraternity. It is for Christians a constitutive dimension of the preaching of the Gospel, because they will be recognized for good œ works they will accomplish. The Church must constantly contribute to the defense of the dignity of man, "at the center of society," and his doctrine "reveals man to himself". Especially in the critical moments of their history, people are confidently turning to it for advice, support and help.
"Let those who have placed their faith in God strive to excel in the practice of good". Spiritual communities and families of thought living in Lebanon, who refer to God whom all adore and strive to serve, must now embark on the path of deeper solidarity; this will effectively result in gestures of friendship and mutual understanding, in the inalienable respect of the dignity of persons, freedom of conscience and religious freedom, constituent elements of the common good.
The Islamic-Christian dialogue
Having lived side by side for many centuries, sometimes in peace and collaboration, sometimes in confrontation and conflict, Christians and Muslims in Lebanon must find in dialogue respectful of the sensitivities of people and different communities. indispensable way to conviviality and the building of society.
The Lebanese must not forget this long experience of relations, which they are called to take back tirelessly for the good of the people and of the whole Nation. For men of good will, it is unthinkable that members of the same human community, living on the same earth, come to be wary of each other, to oppose and exclude themselves in the name of their religions respectively. I thank the Muslim and Druze fraternal delegates for their presence at the synodal assembly and for their active participation in the dialogue.
This dialogue must continue at several levels. First, in everyday life, in work and in the life of the city, people and families learn to appreciate each other. The concrete solidarity experiences are an asset for all the people and an important step in the path of reconciliation of minds and c œ hearts, without which no common work is possible in the long term. Natural wisdom thus leads the partners to a rich human communication and mutual assistance through which the social fabric is strengthened.
Religious dialogue can not be neglected. It must help everyone to look with esteem, to discern and to recognize the greatness of the spiritual pursuits of their brethren, searches that lead to the path of the divine will and which make it possible to advance in the individuals as well as in the collective life. spiritual, moral and sociocultural values.
IFriendliness
It is particularly necessary to intensify the collaboration between Christians and Muslims, in areas where possible, with a selfless spirit, that is, for the common good and not for the good of private persons. or a particular community, or in the hope of obtaining more credit or power in society. Their common consideration of the moral life and their aspiration for a better future will make them all responsible for building the present society and the world of tomorrow, by protecting and promoting moral values, social justice, peace and freedom, defense of life and family. This common work will not fail to give all Lebanese confidence in their brothers and in the future, opening them to the best of modernity.
The Islamic-Christian dialogue is not only a dialogue of intellectuals. It aims, first, to promote the living together between Christians and Muslims, in a spirit of openness and collaboration, essential for everyone to flourish by freely determining the choices dictated by his right conscience. By learning to know each other better and to fully consent to pluralism, the Lebanese will acquire the necessary conditions for genuine dialogue and respect for individuals, families and spiritual communities. Schools and the various training institutes have a key role in this area, since from an early age, learning together makes children attentive to each other and invites them to peacefully manage conflicts that may arise. present.
Solidarity with the Arab world
Open to dialogue and collaboration with the Muslims of Lebanon, the Catholic Church also wants to be open to dialogue and collaboration with Muslims from other Arab countries, of which Lebanon is an integral part. It is, indeed, the same destiny that binds Christians and Muslims in Lebanon and in other countries of the region; each particular culture is still marked by the religious and profane contributions of the different civilizations that have succeeded each other on their soil. Christians in Lebanon and throughout the Arab world, proud of their heritage, actively contribute to the development of culture.
In all the countries and in all the cultures where they are spread, "Christians are distinguished from other men neither by country, nor by language, nor by custom. [...] They conform to local customs for clothing, food and the rest of life, while manifesting the extraordinary and truly paradoxical laws of their way of life". I would like to stress the need for Christians in Lebanon to maintain and strengthen their bonds of solidarity with the Arab world. I invite them to consider their inclusion in Arab culture, to which they have contributed so much, as a privileged place to lead, in concert with other Christians in the Arab countries, a genuine and profound dialogue with the believers of Islam. Living in the same region, having known in their history hours of glory and hours of distress, Christians and Muslims of the Middle East are called to build together a future of conviviality and collaboration, for the human and moral development of their people. peoples. In addition, the dialogue and collaboration between Christians and Muslims in Lebanon can help that in other countries, the same approach is taken.
The building of society
I would like once again to support and encourage the Lebanese people in their social life. Divergences remain between the inhabitants of the country. But they must not be an obstacle to a common life and to a true peace, that is, to a peace that is more than an absence of conflict.
Like all people, because they love their land in particular, the Lebanese are called to take care of their country, to maintain fraternity and build a political system and social fair, equitable and respectful of people and all trends that compose it, in order to build together their common house. No one can escape the moral and civic commitment he must legitimately l within his people. In addition, any public figure, political or religious, and "any group [must] consider the needs and legitimate aspirations of other groups, and even the common good of the entire human family". In fact, action in public life is first and foremost a responsible service of its brothers - of all its brothers - in order to ensure by all means that all work in harmony; those who accept to engage in public service, in political, economic and social life, have the imperative duty to respect certain moral obligations and to subordinate their individual or group interests to the good of their nation. By living this way, they will be examples for their compatriots and they will endeavor to make every effort to bring their actions to the common good. This implies constantly going beyond selfish attitudes, in order to live in a disinterestedness that can go as far as abnegation, in order to guide the whole people towards happiness, by the just conduct of the res publica.
In social life, "the rights, duties," of individuals, cultural or spiritual communities, and peoples can not be despised with impunity. In this area, human progress, both personal and collective, implies a sense of sharing, responsibility and sacrifice. To ignore it can only lead to a profound disruption of order in public relations by indulging everyone in arbitrariness of all kinds and, on the part of all the people, an inevitable loss of confidence in national institutions. As I have already said in many circumstances, "the law of nations and the institutions that guarantee it are irreplaceable references and defend the equal dignity of peoples and persons". Here we have one of the authentic expressions of the common good, the foundation of the political and moral legitimacy of authority and the laws to which people must submit.
I invite all Lebanese to maintain and grow themselves, especially in the younger generations," the firm determination and perseverance e to work for the common good; that is to say for the good of everyone because we are truly responsible for everyone". At the same time, it is desirable to develop an equitable sharing of responsibilities within the nation, so that all can put their talents and abilities at the service of their brothers and feel that they have a specific contribution to make to their children. countries according to the principle of subsidiarity, by their personal creativity and the exercise of their initiative which constitute a right.
Fraternal and supportive life within the national community presupposes that it does not consider its special place as the search for privileges for oneself and for one's own community, possibly excluding others. It is based on the assurance that everyone has, by right, their role in social, political, economic, cultural and associative life, in fidelity to their spiritual and cultural traditions, insofar as this does not preclude common good and does not endanger national life.
I invite all Lebanese to pay special attention to young people, who are the greatest wealth of their country and who, for this reason, must receive professional training and human education, moral and spiritual quality. It is also important that they have their share in the decisions that engage the nation, that they feel welcomed and supported in their professional and social integration and that they can benefit from trainings allowing them to calmly consider their personal future and the building a family. But the changes of structures are linked to a change of hearts, so that all have the concern to participate in the common life, in the respect of social justice. In this spirit, all will care to promote the value of justice between people and between generations, because inequities engender violence, mistrust and selfishness. At the same time, it is important to offer work to as many people as possible, so that certain Lebanese remain forever on the margins of society, have their standard of living drop dangerously or experience situations of extreme poverty, and Others lose interest in the life of their country and are pushed to "some kind of psychological" emigration, because they feel they can not participate in the life of the community and because that they see no future in their home land.
Peace and reconciliation
In past years, Lebanon has been marked by the ordeal of war. Today, these sufferings require a real purification of memories and consciences. It is necessary to develop "a patiently built and lasting peace", because it alone can be the true source of development and justice.
"I leave you peace; it is my peace that I give you; I do not give it to you as the world gives it". Because they have received from Christ, the Prince of Peace, this gift which transforms them inwardly, Christians have the duty to be the first witnesses and artisans; the gospel of peace is a permanent invitation to forgiveness and reconciliation. Peace passes through the diligent practice of human fraternity, a fundamental requirement that comes from our common divine resemblance and therefore flows from a requirement related to Creation and Redemption. Where fraternity among men is fundamentally misunderstood, it is peace that is ruined at its very base. Building peace becomes a service of charity, a prophetic sign of the Kingdom of Heaven.
The message of peace, which Jesus profoundly expressed in the Beatitudes was heard by "people from all Judea and Jerusalem and from the coast of Tire and Sidon", must be transmitted by the disciples of the Lord to all their brethren. So the faithful of Christ must let themselves be led by the Spirit, who brings to light the sin, personal sin and sin of the world, to be converted and to receive the grace that disposes them to prepare the ways of the Lord. "Since the path of peace ultimately passes through love and tends to create the civilization of love, the Church holds her gaze fixed on the One who is the love of the Father and the Son and, despite the growing threats she never ceases to trust, she never ceases to implore and serve the peace of man on earth. His trust is based on the one who, being the Spirit of love, is also the Spirit of peace and who is constantly present in our human world, on the horizon of consciences and hearts.
Today, I therefore urge all Catholics, and at the same time I invite other Christians and men of good will to take prophetic acts and to take up arms of peace and justice. It is urgent to develop and promote among all the components of the Lebanese nation a true education of consciences to peace, reconciliation and concord. In ecumenical and interreligious relations, the meaning of peace is also a fundamental element of fraternal dialogue. One must never forget that a gesture of peace can disarm the adversary and often invites the latter to respond positively to the outstretched hand, because peace, which is a good par excellence, tends to be communicated.
Thus, on the threshold of the third millennium of Christianity, will open a new era for the country and for the region, through pardon and ever deeper cooperation between all components of the national society. These are the essential conditions for building and surviving "a democratic Lebanon, open to others, in dialogue with cultures and religions", capable of ensuring a dignified and free existence for all its members. Rule of law can not be based on force to be respected. It is recognized to the extent that leaders and the people as a whole are concerned with human rights and able to create human relations and exchanges between them in trust and freedom.
Peace requires on everyone's part the firm will to respect one's brothers, to take steps towards them, and it is thus obtained essentially by safeguarding the good of the people and the human communities constituting the same homeland, in what one can call an economy of peace. In this process, the family and the school have a primordial role to play. These are places where people are called to make a special experience of "living together" on the same land. "Those who work to educate the new generations in the belief that every man is our brother build, from the foundations themselves, the edifice of peace".
The commitment to peace of all men of good will will lead to a definitive reconciliation between all the Lebanese and between the different human groups of the country. Reconciliation is the starting point of hope for a new future for Lebanon. The war is over and reconciliation must be seen as the path of deep peace that must be established among all Lebanese. That the end of the armed war is also the end of the war between the different particularisms, the end of the personal conflicts of interests, which sometimes are more terrible because they can become fights of all against all. Let everyone remember that with war we can not get anything. Everyone comes out injured, because the injury of a brother is still that of all his compatriots.
Peace in the country could be fruitful throughout the region and allow all those who have been displaced to return to their places of origin in appropriate conditions, with the help of their compatriots and the community. international. In fact, in recent decades, because of the war, Lebanese families have fled the land that provided their livelihood, and because of the various outbreaks of conflict in the region, other people have also been displaced. While waiting for their return to their land, they must not be left without assistance and live in the indifference of the population with whom they often live in situations of precariousness and poverty, nor possibly in the indifference of humanitarian aid organizations or international authorities. Displaced persons remain in all circumstances human beings, with their dignity and their inalienable rights.
I
The Church at the service of society
Social Scope of the Church's Mission
Everywhere in the world, the Church has the mission to make known the Christ, Son of God, and to announce the salvation offered to all men. In contemplating her perfect man, she was also always aware that she had a specific place in society for the liberation of people from all that hinders their human and spiritual growth, for "the glory of God, he is the living man".
Social service
In his action in society, the Christian must be inspired by the word of God who first invites him to embrace the Lord's concern for the orphans and the poor, who "put on their faces". of Christ "and who are the" beloved of God". From the beginning, the people of the Covenant and the Christian community have always been aware of the paramount right of the poor, the weak and the emigrant. By helping his brothers in need, the Christian participates in the restoration of fraternity lost because of sin and asks Christ to realize the full brotherhood of which the Church is the first fruits. "This is the dwelling place of God with men. He will have his home with them; they will be his people and he, God-with-them, will be their God. He will wipe away every tear from their eyes: from death there will be no more; crying, cry and pain, there will be more, for the former things are passed away". I therefore appeal to the conscience of the faithful, reminding them that we will be judged on the quality of our reception of the poor, the stranger and the one who is in the ordeal. If we have welcomed and helped them, in the evening of our lives, we will hear the Lord say to us, "Come, blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom. [...] Because I was hungry and you gave me food, [...] I was a stranger and you welcomed me".
For this form of witness to the love of God to be understood as a witness of the Church, it is essential that all Catholics work in communion with the whole Church and not only in their own name. "The spirit of poverty and charity is, in fact, the glory and testimony of the Church of Christ".
The aftermath of the war weighs heavily on Lebanese society and creates a socio-economic crisis which affects individuals and families; they are felt in the issues of housing, health, education and work. I would like here to salute the tireless commitment of many lay people and religious institutes in educational services, in medical and social services and in helping the poorest. They thus manifest the solicitude of God and the love of Christ for all the little ones who are his brothers. In rejoicing at what already exists in the country, I call on all Lebanese to continue and develop concrete actions of solidarity and sharing, in all areas of social life, thus confirming the essential interdependence between citizens of the country. the same country, the principle of the universal destination of the earth's goods and the preferential option for those who are poor.
Nobody should be excluded from the networks of economic and social relations. The poor, the marginalized, the physically and mentally disabled, must be able to benefit from fraternal attention and increased solidarity. As far as they are concerned, the patriarchal Churches have a duty to organize themselves to offer effective help, material, spiritual and moral, to all who need it, taking care to manage their heritage properly.
National solidarity must also develop in the field of health. Everyone must be able to benefit from the care and medical assistance they need, regardless of their resources. I invite the Church to reflect on what can be done in this area, as in the pastoral care of the sick who need to be accompanied during their illness. I propose to the Catholic hierarchy to carry out a serious and profound study of the organization of health services in its institutions, with the aim of making them places of ever greater witness of love towards men. In particular, attention will be paid to making care institutions accessible to the most disadvantaged.
The help that the Church can bring to social life is much broader than the points just outlined. The problems, which are often complex, must be studied carefully and be the subject of concerted action by the patriarchies. During the Synod, the laity, religious men and women in the ecclesiastical bodies responsible for considering and implementing actions in the social field were often mentioned. In this area as in the others mentioned in previous chapters, I ask the leaders of the Catholic Church in Lebanon to associate them more closely with the mission of the universal Church for the benefit of all. The patriarchal Churches will also find the modalities of trustful collaboration with other organizations of the society working in the same sectors of activity, in the respect of their own responsibilities and specificities. In particular, Catholics will strive to create a truly Christian spirit in their institutions and develop a pastoral care adapted to the needs of the people who use their services.
The management of Church property
Church property is a means for the apostolate, for social action and for the services that Christians have to perform, from a development and justice perspective. Indeed, "the essential thing is faith and charity to which nothing is better". In the same sense, let us listen to the exhortation of Saint Gregory of Nyssa: "Share with the poor who are the favorites of God. Everything belongs to God, our common Father. And we are all brothers of a single family". In the field of their management, by virtue of my mission as "supreme administrator of all temporal goods of the Church" I ask for a radical commitment from all Eastern Catholic communities, so that they constantly have the concern to achieve a rational, transparent and clearly oriented administration towards the purposes for which the goods were acquired. According to the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, it is incumbent upon the Bishops to ensure that a sound and modern management of the property is ensured in a spirit of total disinterestedness by competent, honest and particularly empowered persons for ecclesial and social service; they are accountable for their stewardship and decisions. It remains obvious that the administration of the patrimony of the Church is an apostolic service which can not have as an end a personal, family or group enrichment.
The principle of Waqfs, their legal regime and their management and exploitation must be reviewed and re-evaluated. To make possible their administration, it is necessary first of all to draw up an inventory of the current state and the real ends of each of the forms of waqfs, their different kinds of temporal goods, and to check its profitability and exploitation. It is also necessary to establish an overall planning of the needs and the correct use of the waqfs, corresponding to the four purposes of the Church goods: the worship, the works of apostolate, the works of charity and the just support of the pastors.
In the line laid down by my predecessors, in particular Pope Paul VI, I have explicitly confirmed that no Church property in the Middle East can be acquired or alienated, except in accordance with the legal norms of the common law, and those emanated especially by the Holy See for the Middle East. In this area, the bishops will exercise their vigilance and take care to give all the members of the people of God, especially seminarians, priests and members of religious institutes, the necessary training.
I know that thanks to the waqfs, many achievements have already been made and I am delighted. I particularly welcome the initiatives taken by patriarchies, eparchies and religious institutes, especially the construction of apartments for young couples and for disadvantaged people. Likewise, I encourage selfless initiatives in this area by laypeople. It is important that the various projects in favor of families who have the least financial means to live are continued and intensified.
The educational service
Catholic Schools and Academic Centers in Lebanon
In the field of education, the Church has a tradition that should be safeguarded. She is called to be an educator of people and peoples. Catholic schools are concerned to participate effectively in the mission of the Church and to provide quality education. For this, all the actors must be closely associated: teachers, students, parents, technical and administrative staff, priests, religious men and women concerned, specific associations of parents of students, teachers and alumni who support school institutions, under the responsibility of the bishops. I encourage educational communities to continue their work for young people, who need to receive the cultural, spiritual and moral foundations that will make them active Christians, witnesses of the gospel and responsible citizens in their country; this supposes that the collaborations intensify and that the coordination between the competent services of the different Catholic patriarchies is developed. The various institutions must be faithful to their mission as Catholic institutions, putting themselves first and foremost at the disposal of the Christian community, but also more widely of the whole country, in a spirit of dialogue with all the components of society., without losing sight of their specific Catholic teaching. The religious dimension of Catholic education should always be more evident; the way of approaching secular subjects, the proposition of a vision of man and of history enlightened by faith, the link with the Church and the lifestyle of teachers who are examples by their behavior, the invitation to a moral right life, the proposal of a deep spiritual life, the knowledge instilled in young people: these are the same points of attention for an integral education of youth. May everyone remember that "the Catholic school [...] has the ambition to simultaneously offer the acquisition of knowledge as broad and deep as possible, the demanding and persevering education of true human freedom and the training of the children and adolescents entrusted to him to the highest concrete ideal: Jesus Christ and his evangelical message "(the knowledge instilled in young people: these are all points of attention for an integral education of youth. May everyone remember that "the Catholic school [...] has the ambition to simultaneously offer the acquisition of knowledge as broad and deep as possible, the demanding and persevering education of true human freedom and the training of the children and adolescents entrusted to him to the highest concrete ideal: Jesus Christ and his evangelical message "(the knowledge instilled in young people: these are all points of attention for an integral education of youth. May everyone remember that "the Catholic school [...] has the ambition to simultaneously offer the acquisition of knowledge as broad and deep as possible, the demanding and persevering education of true human freedom and the training of the children and adolescents entrusted to him to the highest concrete ideal: Jesus Christ and his evangelical message ".
Like all school structures, Catholic institutions are conscious of participating in the construction of society, through education which is the art of training people and offering them the values ​​that deserve to be defended and who must to be transmitted. The educational community participates in the deepening of Lebanese culture, the development of relationships between generations and the relationship of young people with their parents. It should not be forgotten either that it allows young people to calmly consider their future and to find reasons to live and to hope.
To the extent that concrete circumstances permit, the Church in Lebanon strives to be always present in this human activity of primary importance; it knows the esteem of the vast majority of Lebanese and is proud to be able to enroll many children throughout the country without any distinction or discrimination. With the confidence it has been given, it must continue its tasks, taking steps to make its educational institutions accessible to all who can be trained, especially the poorest economically, to enable them to access the basic training necessary for life in society and culture. In this spirit, with the Fathers of the Synod, I also ask the Catholic educational institutions to reconsider, as far as possible, the question of tuition fees in their institutions, so as not to penalize the poorest families. Many of them are already watching. Indeed, hosting poor young people in their schools is a long tradition of the Catholic Church. I encourage Catholic communities to develop a real solidarity with each other and with the young people in their care, so that no young person interrupts their training for purely material or financial reasons. In this area, the generosity of educational institutions and the faithful is appreciated and it is hoped that they will continue to share, in the context of both academic and university training, for students and students in need, those who come rural areas, which often have difficulty finding housing and meeting their basic needs. By realizing this, Catholic schools will contribute to the integration of young people into a culturally rich society and help them to envision a better future.
Universities and Catholic Institutes
There are various academic centers in Lebanon, some of which also teach religious studies. These institutions have their own history and traditions. However, this multiplicity can be a source of difficulties in certain circumstances, if a spirit of consultation and collaboration does not develop. It would be better not to seek to create new centers by the patriarchal Church, but sometimes to regroup and unify these institutions, in order to associate the living forces and to allow certain centers to specialize more, for the good of the faithful. I encourage pastors to promote quality training for all the faithful. It will have a definite impact on people's lives, in the liturgical, pastoral and missionary life of the particular Churches and in relations with other Churches and with all the Lebanese people.
As the Synod Fathers have also noted, higher education institutions bring together a limited number of students compared to that of state universities. To face the great cultural challenges, for a better teaching and for a greater efficiency in the research and the training of the future professors, it is important that the different university institutes consult each other, in order to make common proposals and possibly to group together and entrust certain institutions with a specific university specificity. I invite bishops to focus their efforts on existing institutes, and I encourage the APECL Committee on Academic Affairs to foster collaboration among the various educational institutions.
The freedom of education and teaching is one of the components of the life of a country which is very attentive to cultural realities and which guarantees the freedom of belief inherent in human dignity, perfectly compatible with the general principles teaching. It is important that parents can choose the form of education they prefer for their children, based on their religious beliefs and educational preferences. Public authorities have a duty to make this freedom of choice effective and to ensure that it is not an occasion for discrimination between children and families and that parents do not unfairly weigh too much.
In school and university life, attention should also be paid to the presence and quality of spiritual animation by well-organized chaplaincies, so that young people find forums for reflection and prayer that help them to to unify their lives as Christian men or women, taking into account the knowledge acquired in their educational curriculum. Youth chaplains, religious and lay people who accept the charge, will receive in-depth training and be attentive to the cultural developments of their time. University pastoral care concerns both students and teachers. I therefore invite all patriarchal and religious institutes to provide, as far as they can, priests, deacons, consecrated men and laity for this pastoral ministry.
Information Service
The means of social communication have now become important elements of the education and daily life of our contemporaries, as well as of evangelization in various languages ​​and cultures. The Church has its place, to promote the truth, a condition of all human dignity, and the spiritual and moral values ​​that allow every person to behave every day with rectitude and to develop different aspects of his personality. I encourage initiatives in the Church to promote religious programming, information and education programs, and to help educate adults and youth about the multitude of media messages that sometimes give the impression that all behaviors can be considered equally. In the same way, the Church will take care to train competent people to perceive the stakes of the means of communication.
Political commitment
"The Church which, by reason of its office and competence, is in no way confused with the political community and is not linked to any political system, is both a sign and a safeguard of the transcendence of religion. the human person". His primary mission is to lead men to Christ, Redeemer and Savior. It does not therefore fall to him to engage directly in political life; indeed, "it has no technical solutions, [...] it does not propose economic or political systems or programs, it does not show preference for one or the other, provided that the dignity of the man be duly respected and promoted, and that she herself be given the necessary space to carry out her ministry in the world". However, it is the duty of the Church to tirelessly recall the principles that alone can ensure a harmonious social life, under the gaze of God. Because the Church lives in the world, "all [her] members [...] participate in its secular dimension; but this in various ways. In particular, the participation of the lay faithful has a modality of realization and function, which, according to the Council, is "peculiar and peculiar" to them: it is this modality which is designated by the name of "secular character".
With its wisdom and its concern to serve man and humanity, the Church therefore wishes to help those to whom it belongs to exercise a public activity to l it fully, for the service of their brothers. As she has repeatedly emphasized, she recognizes that there is a right autonomy of human realities, in which man is called to make good use of his righteous reason, in harmony with the supernatural life, superior to that of this world. To all conscience are imposed the principles of humanity, intimating to each one what he must do or not to do.
It is also important to remember that there is a Christian practice of the management of temporal affairs, because the Gospel message illuminates all human realities that are means intended both to edify the human family and to lead to eternal happiness. Christians can not, therefore, "have two parallel lives: on the one hand, life called spiritual with its values ​​and requirements; and on the other, the so-called secular life ", which would have different or opposite values ​​to the former. As a result, "for a Christian animation of the temporal order, in the sense [...] of serving the person and society, the lay faithful can absolutely not renounce participation in" politics ".that is to say the multiform, economic, social, legislative, administrative and cultural action which aims to promote, organically and by the institutions, the common good ".
The lay faithful thus perform a true service to man and the national community, by virtue of their baptism, by which they participate in the triple function of Christ: priestly, prophetic and royal. Especially, by participating in the priestly office, they make their action a praise to the Creator by perfecting creation; by their participation in the prophetic office, they are "called to make the novelty and strength of the Gospel shine in their daily, family and social life, as well as to express, with patience and courage, in the difficulties of the present time, their hope of glory, even through the structures of the life of the century ". As a result, they will be reborn in their compatriots, especially among young people, the hope that a future is possible and the desire to actively contribute to the changes needed to achieve a better life together. The management of public affairs is a path of hope, because it is turned towards a world to be built and it suggests that transformations are possible to improve the condition of men.
The faithful also participate in the Lord's royal office by engaging in the path of spiritual asceticism, overcoming sin and giving of themselves to serve Christ in charity and justice. In this perspective, it is important for all of God's people to know the social doctrine of the Church, which gives elements of reflection, benchmarks and criteria for judgment and decision-making in action, for to lead with rectitude and integrity in the different areas of personal and social life.
From an early age, it is necessary to provide all young people, in the various educational institutions, with an appropriate civic education, to make them aware of their responsibilities as citizens and to promote truth and freedom, justice and charity, foundations of social peace and fraternity.
I rejoice that many Christians work with their brothers of other religious denominations and with all men of good will, in state services, to participate in the construction of a society of justice and peace, with selflessness. and dedication.
Human rights
Among the most important elements of the rule of law is the protection of human rights, ie respect for every person and every group, because the man who lives at the same time in the sphere of material values ​​and spiritual values, goes beyond any social system and is the fundamental value. As I have had the opportunity to say in the UNESCO rostrum, "any threat to human rights, whether in the context of one's spiritual goods or that of one's material goods, is violent to this fundamental dimension ". Because of its prerogatives and functions, the state is the first guarantor of the freedoms and rights of the human person.
After the years of suffering and the long war in Lebanon, his people and the authorities who govern them are called to brave and prophetic acts of forgiveness and purification of memory. Certainly, we must keep alive the memory of what has happened, so that never again this will happen again and never again "hatred and injustice will seize whole nations and push them to actions that] are legitimized and organized by ideologies that rely more on themselves than on the truth of man ". A society can not be rebuilt if each of its members, if its families or the different groups that compose it, do not try to leave the conflicting relationships that marked the times of violence and to quell any desire for revenge. It is through effort, tangible gestures of self-transcendence and reconciliation, which are the signs of the greatness of souls of individuals and peoples, that a common future is possible within a society too long torn by conflict and hostility and intolerance. To open a new future, the Church never forgets that the Lord has entrusted her with a ministry of grace and forgiveness, in order to reconcile men with God and with each other, for love is stronger than hate and that spirit of revenge. It strives to be the interpreter of the thirst for dignity and justice of its contemporaries, and to lead men on the road to peace; it recognizes and salutes the attention of the international community and the many actions undertaken in this field over the past years. tangible gestures of self-transcendence and reconciliation, which are the signs of the greatness of people and people, that a common future is possible within a society that has been torn by conflicts and hostility and intolerance. To open a new future, the Church never forgets that the Lord has entrusted her with a ministry of grace and forgiveness, in order to reconcile men with God and with each other, for love is stronger than hate and that spirit of revenge. It strives to be the interpreter of the thirst for dignity and justice of its contemporaries, and to lead men on the road to peace; it recognizes and salutes the attention of the international community and the many actions undertaken in this field over the past years. tangible gestures of self-transcendence and reconciliation, which are the signs of the greatness of people and people, that a common future is possible within a society that has been torn by conflicts and hostility and intolerance. To open a new future, the Church never forgets that the Lord has entrusted her with a ministry of grace and forgiveness, in order to reconcile men with God and with each other, for love is stronger than hate and that spirit of revenge. It strives to be the interpreter of the thirst for dignity and justice of its contemporaries, and to lead men on the road to peace; it recognizes and salutes the attention of the international community and the many actions undertaken in this field over the past years. which are the signs of the greatness of souls of people and peoples, that a common future is possible within a society too long torn by conflicts and behaviors of hostility and intolerance. To open a new future, the Church never forgets that the Lord has entrusted her with a ministry of grace and forgiveness, in order to reconcile men with God and with each other, for love is stronger than hate and that spirit of revenge. It strives to be the interpreter of the thirst for dignity and justice of its contemporaries, and to lead men on the road to peace; it recognizes and salutes the attention of the international community and the many actions undertaken in this field over the past years. which are the signs of the greatness of souls of people and peoples, that a common future is possible within a society too long torn by conflicts and behaviors of hostility and intolerance. To open a new future, the Church never forgets that the Lord has entrusted her with a ministry of grace and forgiveness, in order to reconcile men with God and with each other, for love is stronger than hate and that spirit of revenge. It strives to be the interpreter of the thirst for dignity and justice of its contemporaries, and to lead men on the road to peace; it recognizes and salutes the attention of the international community and the many actions undertaken in this field over the past years. that a common future is possible within a society too long torn by conflict and hostile and intolerant behavior. To open a new future, the Church never forgets that the Lord has entrusted her with a ministry of grace and forgiveness, in order to reconcile men with God and with each other, for love is stronger than hate and that spirit of revenge. It strives to be the interpreter of the thirst for dignity and justice of its contemporaries, and to lead men on the road to peace; it recognizes and salutes the attention of the international community and the many actions undertaken in this field over the past years. that a common future is possible within a society too long torn by conflict and hostile and intolerant behavior. To open a new future, the Church never forgets that the Lord has entrusted her with a ministry of grace and forgiveness, in order to reconcile men with God and with each other, for love is stronger than hate and that spirit of revenge. It strives to be the interpreter of the thirst for dignity and justice of its contemporaries, and to lead men on the road to peace; it recognizes and salutes the attention of the international community and the many actions undertaken in this field over the past years. the Church never forgets that the Lord has entrusted her with a ministry of grace and forgiveness, in order to reconcile men with God and with each other, for love is stronger than hatred and the spirit of revenge. It strives to be the interpreter of the thirst for dignity and justice of its contemporaries, and to lead men on the road to peace; it recognizes and salutes the attention of the international community and the many actions undertaken in this field over the past years. the Church never forgets that the Lord has entrusted her with a ministry of grace and forgiveness, in order to reconcile men with God and with each other, for love is stronger than hatred and the spirit of revenge. It strives to be the interpreter of the thirst for dignity and justice of its contemporaries, and to lead men on the road to peace; it recognizes and salutes the attention of the international community and the many actions undertaken in this field over the past years.
Within a nation, legitimate authorities have the duty to ensure that all communities and individuals enjoy the same rights and obligations, according to the principles of equity, equality and justice. As citizens in public office, leaders must strive to lead a righteous life, with the humility required for the service of the brethren, to set the example of probity and honesty. Indeed, moral rectitude is one of the essential factors of life in society. In the political, economic and social spheres, those in charge of public life are called to pay particular attention to people who are always at risk of being marginalized from society, to improve their living and working conditions. For that,
To safeguard the man in whom she recognizes the image of God, the Church "always takes up the evangelical cry of defending the world's poor, those who are threatened, despised and denied human rights" ; because Christ came to announce the release of all men and make the truth about man clear. Through the mystery of the Incarnation, God became man. It means that in Jesus Christ the mystery of man is clarified  and that the rights of God and human rights are linked, and that to violate human rights is to violate the rights of God; Conversely, to serve man is also, in a certain way, to serve God, for there is no charity which is not accompanied at the same time by justice. "It is to go to God to serve the poor; you must look at God in their people ".
In order for peace to prevail in Lebanon and in the region, and for progress to benefit all, I urge the authorities and all Lebanese citizens to make every effort to ensure that human rights fundamental rights of positive law prior to any constitution and any legislation of a State, be fully respected, especially in the administration of justice and in the guarantees to which those who are accused and in detention are legitimately entitled.
Among the fundamental rights, there is also that of religious freedom. Nobody should be subject to constraints on the part of individuals, groups or social powers, nor be pursued or excluded from social life for his opinions, nor prevented from leading his spiritual and cultic life "In such a way that in religious matters no one is compelled to act against his conscience or prevented from acting, within just limits, according to his conscience, in private as well as in public, alone or in association with others". The safeguarding of human rights is urgent; it is the future of a nation that is at stake, as well as that of the whole of humanity, because as long as a human being is violated in his most fundamental rights, the whole community of men is injured.
CONCLUSION
"Christ is our hope." As the preparatory documents of the Synodal Assembly already pointed out, "there would have been no appeal to a Synod, if there had been no reason to hope". Among these, we must emphasize the love that all Lebanese bring to their homeland and their dynamism to make this country live. As the meeting on the road to Emmaus was for the two disciples a way with Jesus, the time of preparation and the synodal assembly were a walk with Christ; by rereading the past, with its periods of suffering, its difficulties, its misunderstandings, its joys, its hopes and its experiences of fraternal solidarity, the pastors and the faithful have been able to recognize that the Lord is present in the midst of them and accompanies them and they can leave firmed and transformed, to be ferments of new life in the heart of the world.
During the Assembly itself, the Synod Fathers testified to their profound union in Christ. Through the Holy Spirit, they gave the image of the unity of the Church with many faces, in imitation of the first community of Jerusalem: "The multitude of believers had only one heart and that a soul ". In its mission, the Church is conformed to Christ, who "did not come to be served but to serve", exercising the ministry of service as he did.. The Synodal Assembly, which expressed the hopes of the faithful, is not the end of the approach I wanted for Lebanon, but a step. The Catholic Patriarchal Churches in Lebanon must now tirelessly continue their synodal march in communion, so that hopes may become reality and the hope brought by Christ will illuminate the daily journey of each believer and help him in his participation in the Church. ecclesial and social life. In this spirit, I renew my call for conversion, reconciliation, greater unity and co-responsibility within Catholic communities. This will be an eloquent witness for all men.
Sisters and daughters of the Catholic Church in Lebanon, pastors and laity, hear the Lord's call and do not be afraid to respond with a firm commitment for the good of all. In this new stage of your synodal march, the Catholic Church as a whole supports you with her prayer and her many helpers.
Sons and Daughters of the Church, God accompanies your efforts. May the active presence of the Holy Spirit manifest itself in a constant agreement between you and your pastors! May the love of Christ urge you to realize one Body, live faithful to the Gospel and the Magisterium, and carry out your mission in your land! This Exhortation wants to help you walk together on the road. Take heart to revive in you the sense of the Church, Body of Christ and mystery of communion. The ecclesial mission in Lebanon presupposes the commitment of all and the firm will to highlight the charisms of each person and the spiritual riches of each ecclesial community for a better service of our Master and Lord, Jesus Christ, and his Church. Become aware of your shared mission: to proclaim Christ, the Prince of Peace whose star has risen in your region, to be ferments of unity and fraternity! This will also be achieved through a permanent exchange of gifts among all, with particular attention to the poorest, which is a constitutive service of the Catholic Church to all.
Because it is composed of several human communities, Lebanon is regarded by our contemporaries as an exemplary land. Indeed, today as well as yesterday, they are called to live together, on the same soil, different men on the cultural and religious level, to build a nation of dialogue and conviviality  and to contribute to the common good. Communities, Christian and Muslim, are committed today to make more alive their traditions. This movement is positive and can rediscover common and complementary cultural wealth, which will strengthen the national conviviality.
The synodal experience must be a renewal for the Catholic Church in Lebanon, as well as an effective participation in the revival of the whole country, in order to restore to it the moral and spiritual values ​​that characterize it and ensure its cohesion. The presence of fraternal delegates from other Churches and Christian Communities, as well as from the representatives of the Muslim and Druze communities, underscored the value that all give to an ever more true and intense fraternity and dialogue. These gestures constitute a new stage for deepening dialogue and fraternal dialogue in the country.
Following the Synod Fathers, I urge you, all Lebanese of all faiths, to succeed in this challenge of reconciliation and fraternity, of freedom and solidarity, which is the essential condition of existence. from Lebanon and cement your unity on this land that you love. Differences and peculiarities within society, as well as temptations to stick to personal or community interests, have to take second place. Unity is a responsibility that each of you and each cultural and religious community bear. It must inspire the actions of all in social life. So no one will be afraid of the other; on the contrary, every effort will be made to ensure that the various components are respected and participate fully in local and national life.
During the Synod, I heard the Muslim delegates assert that Lebanon without Christians would no longer be Lebanon. To be truly itself, Lebanon needs all its sons and daughters, and all the components of its population. Everyone has a place in the country and must regain a taste for life and challenges for their future. No spiritual community can live if it is not recognized, if it is in precarious conditions and if it does not have the opportunity to fully participate in the life of the nation. Its members are then tempted to go to other countries to seek a more fraternal atmosphere and to provide for their subsistence and that of their family. In this spirit, I invite all the faithful of the Catholic Church to remain attached to their land, with the desire to be an integral part of the national community, to participate in the reconstruction of what is necessary for families and the community, and to maintain their Christian specificity and their missionary sense, following the example of their predecessors. Likewise, members of other parts of the nation must strive to remain on the land of their ancestors. Of course, all this also implies that the country regains its complete independence, complete sovereignty and unambiguous freedom. members of other parts of the nation must strive to remain on the land of their ancestors. Of course, all this also implies that the country regains its complete independence, complete sovereignty and unambiguous freedom. members of other parts of the nation must strive to remain on the land of their ancestors. Of course, all this also implies that the country regains its complete independence, complete sovereignty and unambiguous freedom.
With the Fathers of the Synod, we entrust this great project to the intercession of Our Lady of Lebanon, the All-Holy, which the Lebanese Christians sincerely worship. In many circumstances she obtained from her Son what discreetly she asked him for. If, in her delicacy, she intervened, she will also intervene so that the Church in Lebanon can testify of the love of Christ. At Pentecost, too, she was there, praying with the Apostles and praising God. Throughout the Synod, she accompanied the prayers and the work of the Fathers and all the faithful.
Dear sons who are in Lebanon, "your ancestors [...] were among the crowds that surrounded Jesus to listen to his teaching. [...] The feet of the Redeemer of the world have trod on your land, [...] his eyes have admired the beauty. [...] I would like [his] loving look to accompany you all ", on this earth which by the passage of the Savior has become a holy land. Be strong in Christ, your hope. Let yourself be led by the Spirit, to do at all times the will of God, who will pursue in you what he has already begun. Lebanese Catholics are therefore called, in the dead and risen Christ, to die to the "old man", that is, sin, selfishness, and individualism. They are also called to forgive and to be forgiven, becoming a source of peace, both for the unity of the ecclesial body and for that of Lebanese society. They will thus testify to the truth of the Resurrection by helping communities to be reborn to hope.
The Synod itself was a providential moment that will enable the Catholic Church in Lebanon to consolidate and strengthen its mission and to gain a clearer idea of ​​its vocation in the universal Church and in the world. Today begins the last stage of the Synodal Assembly, which requires the commitment of all Lebanese Catholics for its effective implementation. This Post-Synodal Exhortation should guide you in your personal life, in your mission of witnessing the risen Christ and in your service to the Church and to society. I ask the patriarchs and synods of the bishops of the patriarchal Churches to ensure that all categories of the faithful can truly participate in the activity of the Church, taking their share of responsibility, according to their state of life and their abilities;
In the Eparchies and the Latin Vicariate, the bishop, who is in charge of unity among all the components of the ecclesial community, will endeavor to promote the action of the faithful and the confident collaboration of all the members of the God. Likewise, in the parishes, the priests will encourage the participation of all the faithful, children, young people and adults, in the daily life of their community. I urge members of the religious orders and all consecrated persons to renew the commitments of their profession, to lead "a life of oblative love", to show every day an ever greater fidelity to the evangelical counsels and to the the teaching of the Magisterium, an increased disinterestedness in the use of the property of the Institutes, which must be above all in the service of the people. It will be, for all their Lebanese brothers, a call to practice in turn sharing and solidarity. Consecrated persons are also invited to deepen their subsidiary relations with the bishops, with a view to greater pastoral unity. Your country has a long tradition of secular organizations that contribute to ecclesial life. It is up to the different organizations to be attentive to the needs of their brothers and to devote all their strength to serving them with humility.
I am in favor of the fact that, as pastors of the Church in Lebanon, the Association of Catholic Patriarchs and Bishops in Lebanon and all Bishops, as far as they are concerned, constitute a special commission comprising bishops, priests, deacons, religious, and lay people, with courageous programs of action, for the reception and application of this post-synodal exhortation. Likewise, each eparchy and religious institute, personally and collectively, should establish a similar commission. Likewise, the different institutions of the Catholic Church in Lebanon, the APECL and the Synods of Bishops of the Patriarchal Churches, the Eparchies, the Clergy, the Institutes of Consecrated Life and the faithful should study the present document. For my part, I assure you of the full availability of the Holy See to help and serve these commissions and the Church in Lebanon, in pastoral work. Concretely, I give a special charge to theCongregation for the Eastern Churches, so that it puts itself at the service of the Church in Lebanon and that it offers all the necessary help to your ecclesial action. The Secretariat of State and the various dicasteries of the Roman Curia, in particular the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, the Congregation for Catholic Education, the Pontifical Council for the Promotion of Christian Unity and the Pontifical Council for Inter-religious Dialogue is also for you interlocutors who wish to facilitate your mission and contribute to the new momentum of your Christian communities.
In giving you this Exhortation, dear sons and daughters of Lebanon, I renew my confidence and, like Christ, I send you into the world, to be witnesses of faith, hope and salvation. May the grace of Christ fill you with charity! The efforts of everyone for love for the Lord and his Church will bring many fruits for ecclesial life and for the whole Lebanese society. Then Lebanon, the happy mountain, which has seen the rising of the Light of Nations, the Prince of Peace, can fully flourish; he will respond to his vocation to be a light for the peoples of the region and a sign of peace that comes from God. Thus the Church in this country will be the joy of her God.
On the threshold of the third millennium, I urge the faithful of the Catholic Church and other Churches and Christian Communities to prepare for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, to be renewed by Christ and to renew the face of the earth. so that "all men may be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth". Thus, the Good News of Salvation will be for all men source of strength, joy and hope; then the people will "grow like a palm tree, it will grow like a cedar of Lebanon".
