INTRODUCTION

Grateful to God, at the end of this Private Synod, we share what we have discussed under the stimulating presidency of Peter's Successor, our Pope John Paul II, and with the participation by some Prefects of the Roman Congregations according to their competencies.

We have presented the results of our consultations to the Holy Father with a view to the well-being of the Church in our country, in which the Church of Christ lives as the one, holy, catholic and apostolic Church.

Our consultation focused on what is desirable for pastoral work in our country and in our time. We were particularly aware of the fact that the serious issues that present themselves to us as ecclesiastical shepherds demand unanimity, a deep sense of cordial and active community. Without this community, the Church cannot fulfill its mission.

We have thought about this unit on two levels:

- as the unity of all believers, the ideal of which is the same as that of the first crystalline community described in the Acts of the Apostles: all believers »persisted in the teaching of the Apostles and the mutual community, in breaking the Bread and prayer «( Acts 2, 42);

- and as the unity of the ecclesiastical shepherds, of which we find a model among the Apostles, who gathered around Peter in Jerusalem to solve some vital problems in a decisive period of the newly begun Church (cf. Acts 15, 6 et seq. ).

Loyalty to the doctrine of the Apostles is therefore a condition of life for the "Communion", and thus the doctrine of the faith and the church order remain the norm to remain faithful to the fraternal community.

In applying this model to our situation, we have thought in advance of the »Communion» of all Catholic believers in the seven dioceses of the Netherlands. It is in view of that community of all that we have discussed the various duties and ministries in the Church.

The community of the Church has its own character. It realizes itself locally and throughout the world at the same time. Subsequently, it has both an institutional and a spiritual side. After all, this community lives on a historical tradition based on the Apostles, while at the same time it is called to be realized in the contemporary world.

Drawing our attention to this complex reality, we have begun to consider the Church as a spiritual community. For that reason we often use the biblical word »Communio«. This word refers to that special fellowship in faith, hope and love, which unites believers with Christ and His Father, and which connects them at the same time. It is the one and indivisible Holy Spirit who, residing in the hearts, unites believers in the one Body of Christ. The word »Communion« therefore means that every believer and his fellow believers share the same calling, the same faith, the same baptism, the same Eucharist, the same ecclesiastical community around the legitimate ecclesiastical leaders, and finally the same mission of the Church in the world.

Regarding this unity of believers, the first Letter of John says that it is at the same time a community among us and a community "with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ" (1 John 1: 3). These words lead us to the very source of our ecclesiastical »Communio«. The Lord himself spoke of this source in his high priestly prayer, when He asked: “May they all be one, as You, Father, are in Me and I in You; may they also be one in Us, that the world may believe that You have sent me "( John 17: 21).

Moreover, these words of the Lord remind us that the concrete and visible unity is fragile and at the same time very precious and indispensable. Certainly, it is Christ who holds us together by his unique Spirit; but this »Communio« is just as much a community of people.

This human aspect helps us to understand the weaknesses and not to be annoyed by tensions, irritations and misunderstandings. These tensions can occur at any level of church life. These tensions can develop into true threats to unity and even create the risk of fractures. They are typical of a Church that Christ has wanted as a spiritual Communion, but just as much as a human and historical institution.

However, we can overcome such injuries. For this reason, the Church, "which includes sinners in its own womb, is at the same time holy and always called to purification, and it constantly strives for penitence and the renewal of life" ( Lumen Gentium , no. 8). The Second Vatican Council has made it very clear to us that the life of the Church is a pilgrimage and that the Church is therefore "called upon by Christ for that continuous reform, which she constantly needs as an earthly institution" ( Unitatis Restintegratio , No. 6).

Our deliberation about what needs improvement went as a fraternal conversation. Not without reason does the Holy Father address the bishops as his brothers. The wealth of faith of the word »Communion« therefore also includes cordial and fraternal relations. In that spirit we prayed together every day and celebrated the Eucharist. With this same fraternity, we have discussed the various issues that were posed to us and we will inform you of the results in the following pages.

We sincerely hope that the implementation of our decisions will benefit all and that the Church of St Willibrord will be all the more convincing as "Communio".



I
THE BISHOPS

 1. The Bishops of the Netherlands unanimously express their firm intention to deepen their cordial and fraternal relationships. By this they mean not only to show their fraternal spirit as human value; they are convinced that in this way they establish a community based on the love that is a gift from the Holy Spirit - despite the difficulties of many kinds that they encounter when they want to give shape to this spirit of solidarity.

 2. The Bishops are aware that giving shape to the community, and certainly when it must be done properly, depends on certain objective conditions, namely the Catholic faith and the manner of exercising the office of the bishop.

A) The Yellow Book, or the Bishop as a teacher of faith.

 3. The Bishops profess their agreement with the content of the Catholic faith as taught by the Roman Catholic Church. They also expressed their full and complete solidarity with the Pope, Bishop of Rome and Supreme Pastor of the universal Church and their faith in the hi § hierarchical organization of the Church. Neither the Bishops nor the priests are representatives of the believers, but servants of Jesus Christ at the service of the church community.

 4. The Bishops acknowledge that the starting point and objective source of faith are in divine revelation, because God who reveals himself "man is the obedience of faith guilty " ( Rom 1. 5; 16, 26; Dei Verbum , no. 5).

 5. The Bishops know that it is their task to proclaim the content of the Revelation, as interpreted by the teaching authority, in its fullness, while respecting the legitimate desires of the people of our time. The Bishops admit that there are differences in sensitivity to the way in which the Christian faith is proclaimed to the people of today.

 6. Regarding the harmony between the Revelation as interpreted by the Magisterium and the aspirations of our time, the Bishops are determined to come to a clear and balanced proclamation of the faith.

 7. The Bishops agree that there is a sense of faith (sensus fidei) among believers of all ages, which theologians must always pay attention to and take into account when interpreting the Lore. According to Dei Verbum No. 8 it is precisely through the reflection and study of the believers, and through their inner understanding of the spiritual realities that they experience, that insight into the Tradition grows. But this sense of faith is not the Revelation itself, nor does it have the same authority as the normative interpretation that the teaching authority of the Church, in full submission to the Revelation itself, gives of it.

 8. In addition to this sense of faith that is typical of faithful believers, there are generally human religious experiences. The latter can form the starting point for religious education and for catechesis. They must, however, be valued in the light of the necessary growth towards full knowledge of faith. People will therefore have to distance themselves from certain catechistic methods that do not go beyond the religious experience alone.

 9. Recognizing that there is a certain diversity (unity indeed does not mean uniformity) in the way faith is expressed or expressed, whether by the mass media, or in the press and other publications, the Bishops will ensure that these diversity does not create confusion among believers. The Bishops propose to use concrete means to give what Vatican II has learned and the documents of the Holy See the desired distribution.

 10. The way pastors bring faith is a matter of prudent policy, especially when it comes to Christian morality. They know that they cannot give up the standard themselves. On the other hand, they must be on the lookout for ways to overcome the lack of willingness or difficulty that some believers have in accepting or applying the standards arising from Christian values. If this willingness is actually not present at all or to a very limited extent, or if the difficulties are very great, the pastors must nevertheless continue to take care of such situations.

B) The Episcopal Administration or the Bishop as Shepherd ..

 11. The Bishops of the Netherlands declare their loyalty to the ecclesiastical rules, as well as their firm will to apply them, according to the official documents of the Church. They recall in particular the importance in this of Christ Dominus , of Ecclesiae Sanctae and of the Directorium for the pastoral task of the Bishops.

 12. The Prefects of the HH. Congregations and the Bishops have recognized that certain difficulties have arisen between them. They agree that cooperation and mutual trust could be strengthened by exchanging information, as fully and regularly as possible, by visits of Bishops to the Dicasteries, or by regular contacts of a delegation from the Bishops' Conference, or also by visits of representatives of the Curie to the Netherlands; also by taking good care of the five-year report of each Diocese and of the minutes of the Bishops' meetings. The desired result of all this must be a strengthened relationship between the Catholic religious community in the Netherlands and the universal Church. The Bishops request a careful investigation,

 13. The Bishops are concerned with the need to establish strongly and maintaining personal relationships with priests, men and women religious, ge ë seemed ngageerde. They also know that believers, more than they used to be, appreciate the personal presence of the Bishop in their midst. In this regard, and in accordance with Christ Dominus Nos. 22-24, the Bishops agreed that a study of the possibility of a new classification of the dioceses in their country will be made as part of the Dutch Bishops' Conference. This new classification does not necessarily have to be implemented in one go for all possible cases.

 14. The Bishops are aware that they are faced with a particularly difficult issue, n. 1. that of the convergence of the exercise of their own responsibility within their own Diocese, and the implementation of guidelines from the Bishops' Conference or from the majority of its members.

From a learning perspective , the Bishops' Conference is a meeting in which the Bishops of a particular country jointly perform their pastoral duties " munus suum pastoral coniunctim exercent ", ( Christ Dominus No. 38. 1). From a practical point of view, »Bishops' groups can deliver multiple and fruitful work to bring the collegial spirit to concrete application« ( Lumen GentiumNo 23). That is particularly true for the Netherlands, which is very densely populated, and which is nowadays growing into unity due to new factors such as urbanization, internal migration and mass media. The Bishops' Conference will be a valuable instrument within that whole to arrive at a "sacred bundle of forces for the benefit of the common well-being of the Churches concerned" ( Christ Dominus no. 37). The nature of the obligation to Leather Bishop in this regard is expressed in the Directorium for the Pastoral Task of the Bishops No. 212:

     a) »The decisions, which were legally taken by the Bishops' Conference and confirmed by the Apostolic Chair, count as laws of the highest ecclesiastical authority (cf. Christ Dominus no. 38, 4). The Bishop takes it with respect and spirit of faith, and implements it, even if he had previously had a different opinion or caused him some trouble, and he oversees the execution in his Diocese.

     b) The other decisions and rules of the Conference are not legally binding. He usually takes over the Bishop, for the sake of unity and love towards his brothers, unless there are serious reasons for this, which he considers for God. He proclaims these decisions and rules himself, in his own name and with his own authority, in his Diocese, because the Conference does not have the authority to bind the proxy with which each Bishop personally acts in the name of Christ (cf. Lumen Gentium No. 27) "( Directorium for the Pastoral Task of the Bishops , no. 212).

The Bishops will do everything in their power to ensure that the "Communion" between them, both affectively and effectively, can deepen itself from day to day and to prevent people from going. will regard them as mutually divided. To that end, they intend to:.

     a) to look for opportunities for common prayer and common celebrations,

     b) to assist each other in carrying out the decisions of this Synod,

     c) to have regular exchanges of views in order idea ë know n, initiatives and individuals, that all that advantage will have their own pastoral office and that common arrangements could be made with better knowledge,

     d) to refrain from making statements that could harm a fellow bishop,

     e) to respect with respect to matters that are more delicate and that are of national or international interest, the procedures derived from the Pastoral Task of the Bishops (no. 212 a and b).

 15. The members of the Synod have taken into account in their reflections the rather complicated nature of the organs and councils at the service of the Bishops' Conference. The Bishops already spend a considerable amount of time on the work of the Bishops Conference. But there is a situation of shared responsibility that does not always secure the bond with the Bishops sufficiently. The Bishop must always be the one who goes before the flock without ever moving away from it. The Bishops are actually responsible for decisions taken by the Conference.

 16. The Bishops hope that the reorganization of the Bishops' Conference, which is currently being prepared, will provide a solution to the problem thus posed. Increasing the number of bishop members could facilitate finding the way out, because it would then be possible for the committees to be chaired or assisted by a Bishop.



II
THE PRIESTS

 17. The members of the Synod unanimously endorse the essential distinction between the clerical or sacramental priesthood, and the joint priesthood of the baptized, and they want to guard the practical consequences arising from it.

 18. With the same unanimity, they profess the permanent character of the priesthood.

 19. The Dutch Bishops speak emphatically their appreciation for their priests, both seculars and regulars, "the diligent staff of the order of Bishops " ( Lumen Gentium no. 25), for their dedication to the pastoral mission of the Church , which is often so difficult in our time.

With regard to spirituality, the Bishops note a positive development: the priests speak more often and with greater openness about their spiritual life than before. Several of them put a lot of effort into becoming professionally skilled with a view to specific tasks, so that they are all the more available to believers and that they can live up to their Christian faith with greater commitment. They try to penetrate into the essential problems of life through their contacts with people. Biblical spirituality takes first place. Yet the spiritual life of priests is threatened by secularization of society, overload, and sometimes by a too " functional " view of their duties.

 20. The members of the Synod are convinced of the value of the spiritual life, of the prayer of the tides, of the daily celebration of the Eucharist, of the sacrament of penance and of the spiritual conversation. They are willing to assist the priests in deepening their spiritual life, for example by encouraging ad hoc initiatives taken by either the local bishop or the Bishops' Conference, if this is possible in collaboration with the Superior Superior of the priest - religious, especially when it comes to spiritual guidance.

 21. The members of the Synod are all convinced that celibacy for the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven is a great good for the Church. They want to be loyal to the decisions of the Popes to uphold the celibacy rule. The Bishops hope that they will find a sufficient number of priests. But even when there is a lack of candidates, members of the Synod confess their faith in Him who is the Lord of the harvest and who will send workers into his harvest (cf. the letter from Pope John Paul II to all the priests of the Church on White Thursday, 1979).

They attach great importance to the support that can be found in living in a community or at least in the mutual help of priests among themselves. They believe that celibacy will only be fruitful for the priest personally and for the pastoral ministry when it is experienced as a true evangelical counsel, unrelated to the other councils of poverty and obedience.

 22 . The members of the Synod are determined to promote an active pastoral ministry with a view to calling to the priesthood and to religious life, even though they continue to study the different forms that the apostolate can take by lay people.

 23. To promote this pastoral ministry, the Bishops have decided to set up a commission for this in each Diocese, or else to charge one or more persons with this task. In each diocese they will appoint someone who will keep in touch with Theological Colleges, with the convicts and with those students of theology who focus on the priesthood, at least if the Bishop does not personally take up this task.

In the whole issue of the pastoral ministry for priesthood and religious life, the Bishops will maintain close contact with the Superior Superior of the Religious.

 24. With regard to possible associations of priests, it is necessary to recall what Vatican II teaches about the relationship between the priest and the Bishop:

     a) The priests - secular as well as regular - share with the Bishop in the one priesthood of Christ. By virtue of their ordination, all priests are in hierarchical communion with the Order of the Bishops ( Presbyterorum Ordinis no. 28). Since they also are incardinated in a local Church, the secular priests are "one presbytery and one family whose Bishop is the father " ( Christus Dominus, No. 28).

     b) The presbytery is represented by the priest council, which is an advisory board ( Ecclesiae Sanctae no. 15).

     c) Possible associations of priests should therefore never be such as to obscure the hierarchical connection of the priests with their Bishop, nor the unique nature of the presbytery or the distinct functions of the Bishop and of the priestly council. If these associations start to exhibit the traits of a trade union, they are incompatible with the organization and spirit of the Church.

 25. The Bishops unanimously express their concern and urgent desire to be assisted by a celibate clergy, to recruit candidates who have such a calling, and to make every effort to achieve results in this area. The formation of these candidates must be in accordance with the provisions of Vatican II (in particular Optatam Totius ), or with the documents derived therefrom such as the Ratio fundamentalis , as requested by the first Bishop's Synod.

 26. That means that this training is only guaranteed by real seminars: either seminars that provide the entire training, such as at Rolduc, or contracts that function as real seminars, although a large part of the education is given at a Faculty or Theological Hogeschool that are recognized by the H. Stoel.

 27. These Faculties or Theological Colleges must meet different conditions if they want to be accessible to priest students. For the details of these conditions, Synod refers to the relevant documents. But by way of example, she recalls some of them, such as: the rights of the Bishops, especially of the Ordinarius loci, to exercise with regard to these colleges their responsibility of teachers of the faith and of guardians of orthodoxy; the rights of the Bishops to exercise their authority in the field of appointment and dismissal of teachers, in the curriculum and in the ecclesiastical sphere to be protected, in particular with regard to celibacy;

 28. In order to monitor the extent to which these conditions have been or will be met, in particular at Theological Colleges, and also to ensure the proper functioning of the convicts and of Rolduc, the Bishops will have a commission of Bishops who will complete his duties before January 1, 1981. This committee will consult the Superior Superior of the Orders and Congregations of Priestly Religious, and also obtain the judgment of the Ordinarius loci. The results of the work of the committee will be submitted to the Bishops' Conference, which, with its advice, will forward them to the Holy Congregation of Catholic Education, taking into account the beginning of the academic year in September 1981.



III
THE RELIGIOUS

 29. The Dutch bishops have high regard for, et religious life as "a gift received by the Church from her Lord " ( Lumen Gentium , no. 43). They are aware of their responsibility towards the unfold ï ng and especially the inspiration of the Lord devotional life. They want to give shape to this responsibility in close cooperation with the Superior Superior of the Religious.

 30. The members of the Synod express their concern about the shortage of novices. They intend to do everything in their power to promote listening to God in the Church and in the Christian communities, which calls for consecrated life, so that many respond generously to this.

 31. More than ever, the Dutch Bishops appreciate the help they receive for the pastoral ministry from the religious as well as the clergy. influence emanating from adbes and monasteries of contemplative life. They praise themselves for the contacts that exist between the Bishops' Conference and the four Unions of Superior Superior.

 32. Regarding what is called affective integration, the members of the Synod note that this expression is interpreted in an ambiguous manner. They recognize the importance of a healthy affectivity, understood in the sense of cordiality and fraternity in human relationships. They appeal to Saint Paul and Saint John to underline that the well-understood love of God and Christ in the Spirit can contribute a great deal to integrating the need for affectivity into brotherly love. But the members of the Synod unanimously reject a kind of "third way " , which is lived as an ambiguous state between celibacy and marriage.

IV
THE LEKEN

A) In general.

33.The members of the Synod are aware that the laity play a large part in the pastoral work of the Church. They express their grateful appreciation to the thousands of lay people who, completely disinterested, regularly and in innumerable ways, participate in various tasks such as liturgy, social activities, catechesis to children and adults, exchange and mutual assistance, promoting justice and peace. These laymen make an effort to make the Church present in an increasingly secularized world, often under difficult circumstances. The Synod also expresses its feelings of sincere gratitude to the countless Christians, especially the sick and the elderly, who support the Church's work through their prayers and sacrifices.

The guidelines that will be given below for pastoral workers will only be able to be fruitful if the many lay people who are currently engaged in pastoral care will continue to do so.

 34. The members of the Synod note that the critical groups, in which priests and religious also participate, sometimes exert too much pressure on the life of the Church. This also applies to certain magazines and other forms of publicity. This criticism stems from groups that disagree among themselves: on the one hand »progressive groups « , on the other hand »conservative « . The Bishops admit that the criticism is partially correct and that it is sometimes accompanied by reasonable desires and useful impulses for the pastoral ministry.

But the influence of this criticism is negative when there is generalization, when there is fanaticism, pressure, refusal to enter into a dialogue, and in the case of unfounded attacks on persons and institutions of the Church. They then call for polarization and are harmful to the performance of the episcopal function as well as to the community among believers; they undermine the spirit of brotherly love and joy that are the hallmarks of Christian life.

The Bishops want to keep in touch with these groups in the hope that they can exercise a moderating influence and also to stay informed in a direct manner. But they also take itself to detect deviations from the faith and the rules of the Church, so that the true "communion " clearly comes to light.

B) The » Pastoral workers « .

 35. The Synod intends to appoint an Episcopal Committee that will investigate what concrete forms can be found for the activity of lay people in the pastoral duties of the Church. This committee will make an analysis of the work of lay people in this field, in particular where these work is performed professionally.

 36. Through its work, the committee will have to clarify:

     a) the distinction between the pastoral duties of the priest, the deacon and the layman;

     b) the desirability of a commitment along the path of the diaconate, given the specific and important role of this permanent office as restored by Vatican II ( Lumen Gentium No. 29);

     c) the specific tasks entrusted to the layman in the Church (especially in the case of a full-time and permanent task), with the specification that this is not a sort of new "office" or ministry - such as the lectorate and the acolyte - nor to have a permanent function with a general mission, in order to avoid the emergence of a parallel "clergy", which would present itself as an alternative possibility in addition to the priesthood and the deaconate. It must also be ensured that any presentation in the community does not take on the character of an installation in office.

In all this, the committee will base itself on the council documents (in particular Lumen Gentium no. 33 and Apostolicam Actuositatem no. 24), as well as on the documents of the Holy Congregation for the Sacraments and for the Divine Worship (in particular Immensae charitatis of 29-1-1973 and the letter to the Swiss Bishops of 17-7-1979) and of the Holy Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (letter of 5-3-1979).

The Dutch Bishops have already experienced that these lay people can be highly valued employees.

 37. Among the priests who have been given up in their celibacy pledge, some perform a function in education or in the pastoral ministry. The Bishop's Synod of 1971 stated that »the priest who has given up the exercise of his office must be treated fairly and brotherly; even if he could offer help in the ecclesiastical service, he should not be admitted to priestly ministries «(2nd part, 4, d at the end). In accordance with the provisions given by the Holy See, this Synod decides the following:

     1) their situation will be settled according to the guidelines of the Holy Congregation of Faith (in particular those of 1971 and 1972);

     2) in each case, it will not be possible to complete such an arrangement from one day to the next, since people and circumstances must be taken into account;

     3) the implementation of this scheme will be entrusted to the local Bishop's pastoral prudence (which will be assisted in this by the council of the episcopal commission in charge of examining the "pastoral workers" problem, and by the advice from the Bishops' Conference).



V
SOME SECTORS OF CHURCH LIFE

These sectors were discussed at the end of the Synod by way of example and therefore necessarily somewhat brief.

 38. Being connected to Christ, living in Him, means first and foremost believing in His Word, but it is just as much participating in the sacraments of faith. Through sacramental grace, Christ communicates himself to us so that we may bear fruit (cf. John 15: 5).

 39. That is very true of the I3. Eucharist. By receiving the Body and Blood of Christ, we get fellowship with Him, and through Him, with the Father and also with our brothers and sisters. That is why we honor the sacred gifts during the celebration of the Holy Eucharist. We also worship the Lord in the Holy Reserve. In order to live with Christ, the Church asks believers to participate in the celebration of the Eucharist, the perfect sacrifice of praise, at least every Sunday and on mandatory holidays.

 40. Just as the Word of the Lord is entrusted to the Church, so too the sacraments. The arrangement of the liturgy depends solely on the authority of the Church. This regulation belongs to the Holy See, and - to the extent permitted by legal regulations - to the bishop, taking into account certain competences conferred by law on the Bishops' Conference (cf. Sacrosanctum Concilium no. 22, 1 and 2).

The Liturgy is a common good of the whole Church; it expresses the perfect worship that is addressed to the Father in Christ and that binds us together in the Holy Spirit. Out of loyalty to Christ and to His Church, the Liturgy must be celebrated entirely according to the official books, as revised according to the guidelines of Vatican II (cf. Sacrosanctum Concilium nr. 22), whereby use can be made of the wide possibilities for adjustment. indicated in the books themselves.

 41. In order to share in the salvation that Christ has brought us, we need the deliverance from our sins and the restoration of fellowship in love with the Father and with our brothers and sisters. This is already one of the effects of baptism, and it is being renewed and deepened by the sacrament of reconciliation.

 42. This reconciliation with the Father and with the Church presupposes the confession of our sins and a genuine will to repent. Despite the current resistance to personal confession, the Bishops ask the priests, in preaching and in catechesis, to restore the appreciation of the sacrament of the Atonement among believers. They ask them in particular to be available to anyone who wants to confess, not in the form of a personal conversation, and at set hours, and also to teach the young people to confess. They express the hope that in the lives of believers, personal confession will also regain its place, because it is the only common way to reconcile yourself to God and to his brothers and sisters in faith.

 43. The members of the Synod express their sincere appreciation for the very many catechists who faithfully perform their duties and who experience no minor difficulties in a secularized world.

 44. Regarding the content of the catechesis, the Bishops insist that the living faith of the universal Church must be expressed. With regard to the method, it must be adapted to the character, the possibilities, the age and the situation of the audience (cf. Christ Dominus no. 14). In this respect, certain forms of research and sensible experimentation are permitted, and patient and trustful conversations with specialists are necessary.

 45. As the primary responsible for catechesis, the Bishops intend to prepare good texts for catechesis, as well as directives based on the General Catechetical Directorium, on the documents of the Synod of 1977 and on the Apostolic Exhortation Catechesi tradendae . While they continually call on the services of specialists and specialized institutions, the bishops still want this area as much as on other personal their task as "teachers of the faith " perform.

 46. The Bishops explicitly encourage ecumenical initiatives as a serious duty that we have been told in particular by Vatican II. They point out the importance of prayer and the fact that every ecumenical activity is essentially very spiritual in nature. Moreover, ecumenical activity can be called ecclesiastical with the utmost right: in its origin, by nature and purpose. Its purpose is not to arrive at the least common multiple, but on the contrary to the fullness of faith. That is why ecumenical activity is supported by the Bishops who will ensure that it continues to take into account the demands of faith, in particular that intercommunion between divorced brothers is not the answer to Christ's call for perfect unity." ( John 17, 21. Compare John Paul II's speech to the American Bishops, Chicago, October 5, 1979).



EPILOGUE

It will be clear that we have not discussed here all the problems that arise in the Church in the Netherlands today. The choice of subjects was determined by our main objective, namely the »Communio « , and according to the possibilities that a Synod could offer us.

Speaking about »Communion « , we are not only talking about a grace that has already been given to us, but also about an assignment that must be carried out. On the basis of the »Communion « that has already been given to us, we must jointly implement the new command of mutual love (cf. John 13: 34).

In this way the Church is, "bringing the gospel of peace to all mankind (cf. Eph . 2, 17-18; Mark 16, 15); full of hope on her pilgrimage to the end point of the fatherland above «(cf. 1 Petr . 1, 3-9; Unitatis Redintegratio nr. 2).



ADDITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

 1. To monitor the implementation of the above decisions, a Synodal Council is established, composed of two members elected by the Synod among the Dutch Bishops and one appointed by the Holy Father.

These three members are:

His Eminence Cardinal Gabriel Marie Garrone, His Eminence Cardinal Johannes Willebrands, Archbishop of Utrecht, and His Excellency Monsignor Johannes Bluyssen, Bishop of 's-Hertogenbosch.

 2. With regard to the members of the two Committees provided in Nos. 28 and 35 respectively of the above decisions, the Synod established the following procedure: His Eminence Cardinal Willebrands and His Excellency Monsignor Danneels will give the names of the propose candidates.

 3.  a) The bishop of Roermond will restore the cooperation with the other bishops in the field of the Papal Missionary Works, the Vastenaktie and the Week for the Dutch Missionary.

     b) The bishops are aware of certain difficulties between the bishop of Roermond and persons and institutions in these three areas. They are willing to help him find a solution to these difficulties.

Accepted after voting by the members of the Special Synod of the Bishops in the Netherlands below.
