The Synod of Bishops, gathered around the Holy Father, turned its thoughts to all the families of
the world, each with its joys, difficulties and hopes. In a special way, the Assembly felt a duty to
give thanks to the Lord for the generosity and faithfulness of so many Christian families in
responding to their vocation and mission, which they l with joy and faith, even when living as a
family requires facing obstacles, misunderstandings and suffering. The entire Church and this
Synod express to these families our appreciation, gratitude and encouragement. During the prayer
vigil held in Saint Peter’s Square on 4 October 2014 in preparation for the Synod on the family, Pope
Francis evoked, in a simple yet concrete way, the centrality [of the experience] of the family in
everyone’s lives: “Evening falls on our assembly. It is the hour at which one willingly returns home
to meet at the same table, in the depth of affection, of the good that has been done and received,
of the encounters which warm the heart and make it grow, good wine which anticipates the
unending feast in the days of man. It is also the weightiest hour for one who finds himself face to
face with his own loneliness, in the bitter twilight of shattered dreams and broken plans; how many
people trudge through the day in the blind alley of resignation, of abandonment, even resentment:
in how many homes the wine of joy has been less plentiful, and therefore, also the zest — the very
wisdom — for life […]. Let us make our prayer heard for one another this evening, a prayer for all.”
Within the family are joys and trials, deep love and relationships which, at times, can be
wounded. The family is truly the “school of humanity”, which is much
needed today. Despite the many signs of crisis in the family institution in various areas of the
“global village”, the desire to marry and form a family remains vibrant, especially among young
people, and serves as the basis of the need of the Church, an expert in humanity and faithful to her
mission to proclaim untiringly and with profound conviction the “Gospel of the Family”, entrusted to
her together with the revelation of God’s love in Jesus Christ and ceaselessly taught by the
Fathers, the masters of spirituality and the Church’s Magisterium. The family is uniquely important
to the Church and in these times, when all believers are invited to think of others rather than
themselves, the family needs to be rediscovered as the essential agent in the work of
evangelization. Think of the witness of so many families that l their Christian mission.
At the Extraordinary General Assembly of October, 2014, the Bishop of Rome called upon the
Synod of Bishops to reflect upon the critical and invaluable reality of the family, a reflection which
will then be pursued in greater depth at its Ordinary General Assembly scheduled to take place in
October, 2015, as well as during the full year between the two synodal events. “The convenire in
unum around the Bishop of Rome is already an event of grace, in which episcopal collegiality is
made manifest in a path of spiritual and pastoral discernment.” These were the words used by
Pope Francis in describing the synodal experience and indicating the task at hand: to read both the
signs of God and human history, in a twofold yet unique faithfulness which this reading involves.
With these words in mind, we have gathered together the results of our reflections and our
discussions in the following three parts: listening, so as to look at the reality of the family today in
all its complexities, both lights and shadows; looking, our gaze is fixed on Christ to ponder, with
renewed freshness and enthusiasm, what revelation, transmitted in the Church’s faith, tells us
about the beauty, the role and the dignity of the family; and confronting the situation, with an eye
on the Lord Jesus, to discern the ways in which the Church and society can renew their
commitment to the family founded upon the marriage between a man and a woman.
PART I
Listening: the context and challenges of the family
The Socio-Cultural Context
Faithful to Christ’s teaching, we look to the reality of the family today in all its complexity, with
both its lights and shadows. We turn our thoughts to parents, grandparents, brothers and sisters,
close and distant relatives and the bonds between two families forged by marriage. Anthropological
and cultural changes in our times influence all aspects of life and require an analytic and diversified
approach. The positive aspects are first to be highlighted, namely, a greater freedom of expression
and a better recognition of the rights of women and children, at least in some parts of the world. On
the other hand, equal consideration needs to be given to the growing danger represented by a
troubling individualism which deforms family bonds and ends up considering each component of
the family as an isolated unit, leading, in some cases, to the idea that a person is formed according
to his own desires, which are considered absolute. Added to this is the crisis of faith, witnessed
among a great many Catholics, which oftentimes underlies the crisis in marriage and the family.
One symptom of the great poverty of contemporary culture is loneliness, arising from the
absence of God in a person’s life and the fragility of relationships. There is also a general feeling of
powerlessness in the face of socio-cultural realities that oftentimes end in crushing families. Such
is the case in increasing instances of poverty and unemployment in the workplace, which at times
is a real nightmare or in overwhelming financial difficulties, which discourage the young from
marrying. Families often feel abandoned by the disinterest and lack of attention by institutions. The
negative impact on the organization of society is clear, as seen in the demographic crisis, in the
difficulty of raising children, in a hesitancy to welcome new life and in considering the presence of
older persons as a burden. All these can affect a person’s emotional balance, which can
sometimes lead to violence. The State has the responsibility to pass laws and create work to
ensure the future of young people and help them realize their plan of forming a family.
Some cultural and religious contexts pose particular challenges. In some places, polygamy is
still being practiced and in places with long traditions, the custom of “marriage in stages”. In other
places, “arranged marriages”are an enduring practice. In countries where Catholicism is the
minority, many mixed and interreligious marriages take place, all with their inherent difficulties in
terms of jurisprudence, Baptism, the upbringing of children and the mutual respect with regards to
difference in faith. In these marriages there can be a danger of relativism or indifference; but there
can also be the possibility of fostering the spirit of ecumenism and interreligious dialogue in a living
together of diverse communities in the same place. In many places, and not only in the West, there
has been a widespread increase in the practice of cohabitation before marriage or simply
cohabitating with no intention of a legally binding relationship. In addition to this, there is often civil
legislation which compromises marriage and the family. Because of secularization in many parts of
the world, the reference to God is greatly diminished and the faith is no longer shared socially.
Especially in some countries, a great number of children are born outside marriage, many of
whom subsequently grow up with just one of their parents or in a blended or reconstituted family.
Divorces are increasing, many times taking place solely because of economic reasons. Oftentimes,
children are a source of contention between parents and become the real victims of family breakups.
Fathers who are often absent from their families not simply for economic reasons need to
assume more clearly their responsibility for children and the family. The dignity of women still
needs to be defended and promoted. In fact, in many places today, simply being a woman is a
source of discrimination and the gift of motherhood is often penalized rather than esteemed. Not to
be overlooked is the increasing violence against women, where they become victims,
unfortunately, often within families and as a result of the serious and widespread practice of genital
mutilation in some cultures. The sexual exploitation of children is still another scandalous and
perverse reality in present-day society. Societies experiencing violence due to war, terrorism or the
presence of organized crime are witnessing the deterioration of the family, above all in big cities,
where, in their peripheral areas, the so-called phenomenon of “street-children” is on the rise.
Furthermore, migration is another sign of the times to be faced and understood in terms of its
onerous consequences to family life.
The Importance of Affectivity in Life
Faced with the aforementioned social situation, people in many parts of the world are feeling a
great need to take care of themselves, to know themselves better, to live in greater harmony with
their emotions and feelings and to seek affective relationships of quality in the best manner
possible. These proper aspirations can lead to a desire to put greater effort into building
relationships of self-giving and creative reciprocity, which are empowering and supportive like
those within a family. In this case, however, individualism and living only for one’s self are a real
danger. The challenge for the Church is to assist couples in their emotive maturation and affective
development through fostering dialogue, virtue and trust in the merciful love of God. The full
commitment required in marriage can be a strong antidote to the temptation of a selfish
individualism.
Cultural tendencies in today’s world seem to set no limits on a person’s affectivity in which
every aspect needs to be explored, even those which are highly complex. Indeed, nowadays the
question of affective fragility is a pressing one; a narcissistic, unstable or changeable affectivity
does not always allow a person to grow to maturity. Particularly worrisome is the spread of
pornography and the commercialization of the body, fostered also by a misuse of the internet and
reprehensible situations where people are forced into prostitution. In this context, couples are often
uncertain, hesitant and struggling to find ways to grow. Many tend to remain in the early stages of
their affective and sexual life. A crisis in a couple’s relationship destabilizes the family and may
lead, through separation and divorce, to serious consequences for adults, children and society as a
whole, weakening its individual and social bonds. The decline in population, due to a mentality
against having children and promoted by the world politics of reproductive health, creates not only
a situation in which the relationship between generations is no longer ensured but also the danger
that, over time, this decline will lead to economic impoverishment and a loss of hope in the future.
The development of bio-technology has also had a major impact on the birthrate.
Pastoral Challenges
In this regard, the Church is conscious of the need to offer a word of truth and hope, which is
based that man comes from God, and that, consequently, a reflection of capable of reframing the
great questions about the meaning of human existence can be responsive to humanity's most
profound expectations. The great values of marriage and the Christian family correspond to the
search that characterizes human existence, even in these times of individualism and hedonism.
People need to be accepted in the concrete circumstances of life. We need to know how to support
them in their searching and to encourage them in their hunger for God and their wish to feel fully
part of the Church, also including those who have experienced failure or find themselves in a
variety of situations. The Christian message always contains in itself the reality and the dynamic of
mercy and truth that meet in Christ.
Looking at Christ: the Gospel of the Family
Looking at Jesus and the Divine Pedagogy in the History of Salvation
In order to “walk among contemporary challenges, the decisive condition is to maintain a fixed
gaze on Jesus Christ, to pause in contemplation and in adoration of his Face.... Indeed, every time
we return to the source of the Christian experience, new paths and undreamed of possibilities open
up”. Jesus looked upon the women and the men he
met with love and tenderness, accompanying their steps with patience and mercy, in proclaiming
the demands of the Kingdom of God.
Since the order of creation is determined by its orientation towards Christ, a distinction needs
to be made without separating the various levels through which God communicates to humanity
the grace of the covenant. By reason of the divine pedagogy, according to which the order of
creation develops through successive stages to the order of redemption, we need to understand
the newness of the Christian Sacrament of Marriage in continuity with natural marriage of the
origins, that is, the manner of God’s saving action in both creation and the Christian life. In
creation, because all things were made through Christ and for him, Christians “gladly
and reverently lay bare the seeds of the Word which lie hidden among their fellows; they ought to
follow attentively the profound changes which are taking place among peoples”. In
the Christian life, the reception of Baptism brings the believer into the Church through the domestic
church, namely, the family; thus beginning “a dynamic process [which] develops, one which
advances gradually with the progressive integration of the gifts of God”, in
an ongoing conversion to a love that saves us from sin and gives us fullness of life.
Jesus himself, referring to the original plan of the human couple, reaffirms the indissoluble
union between a man and a woman, though saying to the Pharisees that “for your hardness of
heart Moses allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it was not so”.
The indissolubility of marriage (“what therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder”),
is to be understood not as a “yoke” imposed on persons but as a “gift” to a husband and
wife united in marriage. In this way, Jesus shows how God’s humbling act of coming to earth might
always accompany the human journey and might heal and transform a hardened heart with his
grace, orientating it towards its principle, by way of the cross. The Gospels make clear that Jesus’
example is paradigmatic for the Church. In fact, Jesus was born in a family; he began to work his
signs at the wedding of Cana and he announced the meaning of marriage as the fullness of
revelation that restores the original divine plan. At the same time, however, he put what
he taught into practice and manifested the true meaning of mercy, clearly illustrated in his meeting
with the Samaritan woman  and with the adulteress. By looking at the sinner
with love, Jesus leads the person to repentance and conversion (“Go and sin no more”), which is
the basis for forgiveness.
The Family in God’s Salvific Plan
The words of eternal life, which Jesus gave to his disciples, included the teaching on marriage
and the family. Jesus’ teaching allows us to distinguish three basic stages in God's plan for
marriage and the family. In the beginning, there is the original family, when God the Creator
instituted the first marriage between Adam and Eve as the solid foundation of the family. God not
only created human beings male and female, but he also blessed them so they might
be fruitful and multiply. For this reason, “a man leaves his father and his mother and
cleaves to his wife and the two become one flesh”. This union was wounded by sin and
became the historical form of marriage among the People of God, for which Moses granted the
possibility of issuing a bill of divorce. This was the principal practice in the time of
Jesus. With Christ’s coming and his reconciling a fallen world through his redemption, the period
begun by Moses ended.
Jesus, who reconciled all things in himself, restored marriage and the family to their original
form. Marriage and the family have been redeemed by Christ, restored
in the image of the Holy Trinity, the mystery from which every true love flows. The spousal
covenant, originating in creation and revealed in the history of salvation, receives its full meaning in
Christ and his Church. Through his Church, Christ bestows on marriage and the family the grace
necessary to witness to the love of God and to live the life of communion. The Gospel of the Family
spans the history of the world from the creation of man in the image and likeness of God
until it reaches, at the end of time, its fulfillment in the mystery of the Christ’s Covenant with
the wedding of Lamb.
The Family in the Church’s Documents
“Throughout the centuries, the Church has maintained her constant teaching on marriage and
family. One of the highest expressions of this teaching was proposed by the Second Vatican
Council, in the Pastoral Constitution Gaudium et Spes, which devotes an entire chapter to
promoting the dignity of marriage and the family. This document
defined marriage as a community of life and love, placing love at the
center of the family and manifesting, at the same time, the truth of this love in counter distinction to
the various forms of reductionism present in contemporary culture. The ‘true love between
husband and wife’ implies a mutual gift of self and includes and integrates
the sexual and affective aspects, according to the divine plan.
Furthermore, Gaudium et Spes, emphasizes the grounding of the spouses in Christ. Christ the
Lord ‘comes into the lives of married Christians through the Sacrament of Matrimony’ and remains
with them. In the Incarnation, he assumes human love, purifies it and brings it to fulfillment and
gives to the spouses, with his Spirit, the capacity to live that love, permeating every part of their
lives of faith, hope and charity. In this way, the bride and groom are, so to speak, consecrated and,
through his grace, they build up the Body of Christ and are a domestic church
so that the Church, in order fully to understand her mystery, looks to the Christian family, which
manifests her in a real way”.
“In the wake of Vatican II, the papal Magisterium has further refined the doctrine on marriage
and the family. In a special way, Blessed Pope Paul VI, in his Encyclical Humanae Vitae, displayed
the intimate bond between conjugal love and the generation of life. Pope Saint. John Paul II devoted
special attention to the family in his catechesis on human love, his Letter to Families
and, especially, his Apostolic Exhortation Familiaris Consortio. In these documents, the
Pope called the family the ‘way of the Church,’ gave an overview on the vocation of man and
woman to love and proposed the basic guidelines for the pastoral care of the family and the
presence of the family in society. In specifically treating ‘conjugal love’,
he described how the spouses, through their mutual love, receive the gift of the Spirit of Christ
and live their call to holiness”.
“Pope Benedict XVI, in his Encyclical Deus Caritas Est, again took up the topic of the truth of
the love between man and woman, which is fully understood only in light of the love of Christ
Crucified. The Pope emphasized that ‘marriage based on an exclusive
and definitive love becomes the icon of the relationship between God and his people and vice
versa. God's way of loving becomes the measure of human love’. Moreover,
in his Encyclical Caritas in Veritate, he emphasizes the importance of love as the principle of life in
society, the place where a person learns to experience the common
good”.
“Pope Francis, in his Encyclical Lumen Fidei, treating the connection between the family and
faith, writes: ‘Encountering Christ, letting themselves (young people) be caught up in and guided by
his love, enlarges the horizons of existence, gives it a firm hope which will not disappoint. Faith is
no refuge for the fainthearted, but something which enhances our lives. It makes us aware of a
magnificent calling, the vocation of love. It assures us that this love is trustworthy and worth
embracing, for it is based on God’s faithfulness which is stronger than our every weakness’".
The Indissolubility of Marriage and the Joy of Sharing Life Together
Mutual self-giving in the Sacrament of Marriage is grounded in the grace of Baptism, which
establishes the foundational covenant of every person with Christ in the Church. In accepting each
other and with Christ’s grace, the engaged couple promises a total self-giving, faithfulness and
openness to new life. The married couple recognizes these elements as constitutive in marriage,
gifts offered to them by God, taking seriously their mutual commitment, in God’s name and in the
presence of the Church. So, in faith it is possible to assume the goods of marriage as
commitments which are more sustainable through the help of the grace of the Sacrament. God
consecrates the love of husband and wife and confirms its indissolubility, offering them assistance
to live their faithfulness, mutual complementarity and openness to life. Therefore, the Church looks
to married couples as the heart of the entire family, which, in turn, looks to Jesus.
From the same perspective, in keeping with the teaching of the Apostle who said that the whole
of creation was planned in Christ and for him, the Second Vatican Council wished to
express appreciation for natural marriage and the valid elements present in other religions
and cultures, despite their limitations and shortcomings.
The presence of the seeds of the Word in these cultures could even be
applied, in some ways, to marriage and the family in so many non-Christian societies and
individuals. Valid elements, therefore, exist in some forms outside of Christian marriage — based,
however, on a stable and true relationship of a man and a woman — which, in any case, we
maintain are oriented towards Christian marriage. With an eye to the popular wisdom of different
peoples and cultures, the Church also recognizes this type of family as the basic, necessary and
fruitful unit for humanity’s life together.
The Truth and Beauty of the Family and Mercy Towards Broken and Fragile Families
With inner joy and deep comfort, the Church looks to families who remain faithful to the
teachings of the Gospel, encouraging them and thanking them for the testimony they offer. In fact,
they witness, in a credible way, to the beauty of a marriage which is indissoluble and faithful
forever, while always remaining faithful to each other. Within the family, “which could be called a
domestic church”, a person begins a Church experience of communion
among persons, which reflects, through grace, the Mystery of the Holy Trinity. “In a family, a person
learns the effort and the joy of work, fraternal love, and generosity in forgiving others — always
renewed — and above all divine worship in prayer and the offering of one's life” (Catechism of the
Catholic Church, 1657). The Holy Family of Nazareth is a wondrous model in whose school we
“understand why we have to maintain spiritual discipline, if we wish to follow the teachings of the
Gospel and become Christ’s disciples”.
The Gospel of the Family also nourishes the seeds which are still waiting to grow; and
serves as the basis for caring for those trees which have withered and must not be neglected.
The Church, a sure teacher and caring mother, recognizes that the only marriage bond for
those who are baptized is sacramental and any breach of it is against the will of God. At the same
time, the Church is conscious of the weakness of many of her children who are struggling in their
journey of faith. “Consequently, without detracting from the evangelical ideal, they need to
accompany with mercy and patience the eventual stages of personal growth as these
progressively occur. [...] A small step in the midst of great human limitations can be more pleasing
to God than a life which outwardly appears in order and passes the day without confronting great
difficulties. Everyone needs to be touched by the comfort and attraction of God’s saving love,
which is mysteriously at work in each person, above and beyond their faults and failings”.
In considering a pastoral approach towards people who have contracted a civil marriage, who
are divorced and remarried or simply living together, the Church has the responsibility of helping
them understand the divine pedagogy of grace in their lives and offering them assistance so they
can reach the fullness of the God’s plan for them. Looking to Christ, whose light illumines every
person, the Church turns with love to those who participate in her
life in an incomplete manner, recognizing that the grace of God works also in their lives by giving
them the courage to do good, to care for one another in love and to be of service to the community
in which they live and work.
The Church looks with concern at the distrust of many young people in relation to a
commitment in marriage and suffers at the haste with which many of the faithful decide to put an
end to the obligation they assumed and to take on another. These lay faithful, who are members of
the Church, need pastoral attention that is merciful and encouraging and that adequately
distinguishes situations. Young people who are baptized should be encouraged to understand that
the Sacrament of Marriage can enrich their prospects of love and that they can be sustained by the
grace of Christ in the Sacrament and by the possibility of participating fully in the life of the Church.
In this regard, a new aspect of family ministry is requiring attention today — the reality of civil
marriages between a man and woman, traditional marriages and, taking into consideration the
differences involved, even cohabitation. When a union reaches a particular stability, legally
recognized, characterized by deep affection and responsibility for children and showing an ability to
overcome trials, these unions can offer occasions for guidance with an eye towards the eventual
celebration of the Sacrament of Marriage. Very often, on the other hand, a couple lives together not
in view of a possible future marriage but without any intention of a legally binding relationship.
In accordance with Christ’s mercy, the Church must accompany with attention and care the
weakest of her children, who show signs of a wounded and lost love, by restoring in them hope
and confidence, like the beacon of a lighthouse in a port or a torch carried among the people to
enlighten those who have lost their way or who are in the midst of a storm. Conscious that the
most merciful thing is to tell the truth in love, we go beyond compassion. Merciful love, as it attracts
and unites, transforms and elevates. It is an invitation to conversion. We understand the Lord’s
attitude in the same way; he does not condemn the adulterous woman, but asks her to sin no more.
Confronting the Situation: Pastoral Perspectives
Proclaiming the Gospel of the Family Today in Various Contexts
Discussion at the synod focused on some of the more urgent pastoral needs to be addressed
in the local Churches, in communion cum Petro et sub Petro. Proclaiming the Gospel of the Family
is urgently needed in the work of evangelization. The Church has to carry this out with the
tenderness of a mother and the clarity of a teacher, in faithfulness to the mercy
displayed in Christ’s kenosis. Truth became flesh in human weakness, not to condemn it but to
save it.
Evangelizing is the shared responsibility of all God’s people, each according to his ministry and
charism. Without the joyous testimony of married people and families, domestic churches,
proclamation, even if done in its proper way, risks being misunderstood or lost in a flurry of words
that is characteristic of society today. On various occasions, the
synod fathers emphasized that Catholic families, by reason of the grace of the Sacrament of
Marriage, are called upon to be the active agents in every pastoral activity on behalf of the family.
The primacy of grace needs to be highlighted and, consequently, the possibilities that the Spirit
provides in the Sacrament. It is a question of allowing people to experience that the Gospel of the
Family is a joy that “fills hearts and lives”, because in Christ we are “set free from sin, sorrow, inner
emptiness, and loneliness”. In light of the Parable of the Sower
our task is to cooperate in the sowing; the rest is God’s work; nor must we forget that, in
preaching about the family, the Church is a sign of contradiction.
Consequently, this work calls for missionary conversion by everyone in the Church, that is, not
stopping at proclaiming a merely theoretical message with no connection to people’s real
problems. We must continually bear in mind that the crisis of faith has led to a crisis in marriage
and the family and that, consequently, the transmission of faith itself from parents to children has
often been interrupted. In the face of a strong faith, the imposition of certain cultural perspectives
which weaken the family and marriage will cause no harm.
Conversion also needs to be seen in the language we use, so that it might prove to be
effectively meaningful. Proclamation needs to create an experience where the Gospel of the
Family responds to the deepest expectations of the human person: a response to each one’s
dignity and complete fulfillment in reciprocity, communion and fruitfulness. This does not consist,
not in merely presenting a set of rules, but in espousing values that respond to the needs of those
who find themselves today even in the most secularized of countries.
The Word of God is the source of life and spirituality for the family. All pastoral work on behalf
of the family must allow people to be interiorly fashioned and formed as members of the domestic
church through the Church’s prayerful reading of Sacred Scripture. The Word of God is not only
good news in a person’s private life but also a criterion of judgment and a light in discerning the
various challenges that married couples and families encounter.
At the same time, many synod fathers insisted on a more positive approach to the richness of
various religious experiences, without overlooking the inherent difficulties. In these different
religious realities and in the great cultural diversity that characterizes countries, positive
possibilities should be appreciated first, and then, on this basis, limitations and deficiencies should
be evaluated.
Christian marriage is a vocation that is undertaken with due preparation in a journey of faith
with a proper process of discernment and is not to be considered only a cultural tradition or social
or legal requirement. Therefore, formation is needed to accompany the person and couple in such
a way that the life experience of the entire ecclesial community can be united with the teaching of
the contents of the faith.
The synod fathers repeatedly called for a thorough renewal of the Church’s pastoral practice in
light of the Gospel of the Family and for replacing its current emphasis on individuals. For this
reason, the synod fathers repeatedly insisted on renewal in the training of priests, deacons,
catechists and other pastoral workers with a greater involvement of families.
They equally highlighted the fact that evangelization needs to denounce with clarity cultural,
social, political and economic factors, such as the excessive importance given to market logic, that
prevent authentic family life and lead to discrimination, poverty, exclusion, and violence.
Consequently, dialogue and cooperation need to be developed with the social entities and
encouragement given to Christian lay people who are involved, as Christians, in the cultural and
socio-political fields.
Guiding Engaged Couples in Their Preparation for Marriage
The complex social reality and the changes affecting the family today require a greater effort on
the part of the whole Christian community in preparing those who are about to be married. The
importance of the virtues needs to be included. Among these, chastity proves invaluable in the
genuine growth of love between persons. In this regard, the synod fathers jointly insisted on the
need to involve the entire community more extensively by favoring the witness of families
themselves and including preparation for marriage in the course of Christian Initiation as well as
emphasizing the connection between marriage, Baptism and the other sacraments. Likewise, they
felt that specific programs were needed in preparing couples for marriage, programs that
create a true experience of participation in ecclesial life and thoroughly treat the various aspects of
family life.
Accompanying the Married Couple in the Initial Years of Marriage
The initial years of marriage are a vital and sensitive period during which couples become more
aware of the challenges and meaning of married life. Consequently, pastoral accompaniment
needs to go beyond the actual celebration of the Sacrament. In this
regard, experienced couples are of great importance in any pastoral activity. The parish is the ideal
place for these experienced couples to be of service to younger couples, with the possible
cooperation of associations, ecclesial movements and new communities. Married couples need
encouragement in a basic openness to the great gift of children. The importance of family
spirituality, prayer and participation in the Sunday Eucharist needs emphasis so couples might be
encouraged to meet regularly to promote growth in their spiritual life and solidarity in the concrete
demands of life. Meaningful liturgies, devotional practices and the Eucharist celebrated for families,
especially on the wedding anniversary, were mentioned as vital factors in fostering evangelization
through the family.
Pastoral Care for Couples Civilly Married or Living Together
While continuing to proclaim and foster Christian marriage, the Synod also encourages
pastoral discernment of the situations of a great many who no longer live this reality. Entering into
pastoral dialogue with these persons is needed to distinguish elements in their lives that can lead
to a greater openness to the Gospel of Marriage in its fullness. Pastors ought to identify elements
that can foster evangelization and human and spiritual growth. A new element in today’s pastoral
activity is a sensitivity to the positive aspects of civilly celebrated marriages and, with obvious
differences, cohabitation. While clearly presenting the Christian message, the Church also needs
to indicate the constructive elements in these situations that do not yet or no longer correspond to
it.
The synod fathers also noted that in many countries “an increasing number of people live
together ad experimentum, in unions that have not been religiously or civilly recognized”.
In some countries, this occurs especially in traditional marriages that
are arranged between families and often celebrated in different stages. Other countries are
witnessing a continual increase in the number of those who, after having lived together for a long
period, request the celebration of marriage in Church. Simply to live together is often a choice
based on a general attitude opposed to anything institutional or definitive; it can also be done while
awaiting more security in life (a steady job and steady income). Finally, in some countries de facto
marriages are very numerous, not only because of a rejection of values concerning the family and
matrimony but primarily because celebrating a marriage is considered too expensive in the social
circumstances. As a result, material poverty leads people into de facto unions.
All these situations require a constructive response, seeking to transform them into
opportunities that can lead to the fullness of marriage and family in conformity with the Gospel.
These couples need to be provided for and guided patiently and discreetly. With this in mind, the
witness of authentic Christian families is particularly appealing and important as agents in the
evangelization of the family.
Caring for Wounded Families (Persons who are Separated, Divorced and Not Remarried,
Divorced and Remarried and Single-Parent Families)
Married couples with problems in their relationship should be able to count on the assistance
and guidance of the Church. The pastoral work of charity and mercy seeks to help persons recover
and restore relationships. Experience shows that with proper assistance and acts of reconciliation,
though grace, a great percentage of troubled marriages find a solution in a satisfying manner. To
know how to forgive and to feel forgiven is a basic experience in family life. Forgiveness between
husband and wife permits a couple to experience a never-ending love that does not pass away.
At times, this is difficult, but those who have received God’s forgiveness are given the
strength to offer a genuine forgiveness that regenerates persons.
The necessity for courageous pastoral choices was particularly evident at the Synod. Strongly
reconfirming their faithfulness to the Gospel of the Family and acknowledging that separation and
divorce are always wounds that cause deep suffering to the married couple and to their children,
the synod fathers felt the urgent need to embark on a new pastoral course based on the present
reality of weaknesses within the family, knowing oftentimes that these are more “endured” with
suffering than freely chosen. These situations vary because of personal, cultural and socioeconomic
factors. Therefore, solutions need to be considered in a variety of ways, as suggested by
Pope Saint. John Paul II.
All families should, above all, be treated with respect and love and accompanied on their
journey as Christ accompanied the disciples on the road to Emmaus. In a particular way, the words
of Pope Francis apply in these situations: “The Church will have to initiate everyone – priests,
religious and laity – into this ‘art of accompaniment’, which teaches us to remove our sandals
before the sacred ground of the other. The pace of this accompaniment must be steady
and reassuring, reflecting a closeness and compassion which, at the same time, heals, liberates
and encourages growth in the Christian life”.
A special discernment is indispensable for pastorally guiding persons who are separated,
divorced or abandoned. Respect needs to be primarily given to the suffering of those who have
unjustly endured separation, divorce or abandonment, or those who have been forced by
maltreatment from a husband or a wife to interrupt their life together. To forgive such an injustice
that has been suffered is not easy, but grace makes this journey possible. Pastoral activity, then,
needs to be geared towards reconciliation and mediation of differences, which might even take
place in specialized “listening centers” established in dioceses. At the same time, the synod fathers
emphasized the necessity of addressing, in a faithful and constructive fashion, the consequences
of separation or divorce on children, in every case the innocent victims of the situation. Children
must not become an “object” of contention. Instead, every suitable means ought to be sought to
ensure that they can overcome the trauma of a family break-up and grow as serenely as possible.
In each case, the Church is always to point out the injustice that very often is associated with
divorce. Special attention is to be given in the guidance of single-parent families, so that women
who have to bear alone the responsibility of providing a home and raising their children can receive
assistance.
A great number of synod fathers emphasized the need to make the procedure in cases of
nullity more accessible and less time-consuming, and, if possible, at no expense. They proposed,
among others, the dispensation of the requirement of second instance for confirming sentences;
the possibility of establishing an administrative means under the jurisdiction of the diocesan
bishop; and a simple process to be used in cases where nullity is clearly evident. Some synod
fathers, however, were opposed to these proposals, because they felt that they would not
guarantee a reliable judgment. In all these cases, the synod fathers emphasized the primary
character of ascertaining the truth about the validity of the marriage bond. Among other proposals,
the role which faith plays in persons who marry could possibly be examined in ascertaining the
validity of the Sacrament of Marriage, all the while maintaining that the marriage of two baptized
Christians is always a sacrament.
With respect to marriage cases, the streamlining of the procedure, requested by many synod
fathers, in addition to the preparation of a sufficient number of persons — clerics and lay people —
primarily dedicated to this work will require increased responsibility of the diocesan bishop. This
work could be done through specially trained counselors who would be able to offer free advice to
the concerned parties on the validity of their marriage. This work could be done in an office or by
qualified persons.
Divorced people who have not remarried, who oftentimes bear witness to their promise of
faithfulness in marriage, ought to be encouraged to find in the Eucharist the nourishment they need
to sustain them in their present state of life. The local community and pastors ought to accompany
these people with solicitude, particularly when children are involved or when they are in serious
financial difficulty.
Likewise, those who are divorced and remarried require careful discernment and an
accompaniment of great respect. Language or behavior that might make them feel an object of
discrimination should be avoided, all the while encouraging them to participate in the life of the
community. The Christian community’s care of such persons is not to be considered a weakening
of its faith and testimony to the indissolubility of marriage, but, precisely in this way, the community
is seen to express its charity.
The synod father also considered the possibility of giving the divorced and remarried access to
the Sacraments of Penance and the Eucharist. Various synod fathers insisted on maintaining the
present discipline, because of the constitutive relationship between participation in the Eucharist
and communion with the Church as well as her teaching on the indissoluble character of marriage.
Others proposed a more individualized approach, permitting access in certain situations and with
certain well-defined conditions, primarily in irreversible situations and those involving moral
obligations towards children who would have to endure unjust suffering. Access to the sacraments
might take place if preceded by a penitential practice, determined by the diocesan bishop. The
subject needs to be thoroughly examined, bearing in mind the distinction between an objective
sinful situation and extenuating circumstances, given that “imputability and responsibility for an
action can be diminished or even nullified by ignorance, inadvertence, duress, fear, habit,
inordinate attachments, and other psychological or social factors”.
Some synod fathers maintained that divorced and remarried persons or those living together
can have fruitful recourse to a spiritual communion. Others raised the question as to why, then,
they cannot have access to sacramental Communion. As a result, the synod fathers requested that
further theological study in the matter with a view to making clear the distinctive features of the two
forms and their connection with the theology of marriage.
The problems relative to mixed marriages were frequently raised in the interventions of the
synod fathers. The differences in the matrimonial regulations of the Orthodox Churches creates
serious problems in some contexts, which require due consideration from the point of view of
ecumenism. Analogously, the contribution of the dialogue with other religions would be important
for interreligious marriages.
Pastoral Attention towards Persons with Homosexual Tendencies
Some families have members who have a homosexual tendency. In this regard, the synod
fathers asked themselves what pastoral attention might be appropriate for them in accordance with
Church teaching: “There are absolutely no grounds for considering homosexual unions to be in any
way similar or even remotely analogous to God's plan for marriage and family.” Nevertheless, men
and women with a homosexual tendency ought to be received with respect and sensitivity. “Every
sign of unjust discrimination in their regard should be avoided” (Congregation for the Doctrine of
the Faith, Considerations Regarding Proposals to Give Legal Recognition to Unions Between
Homosexual Persons, 4).
Exerting pressure in this regard on the Pastors of the Church is totally unacceptable: it is
equally unacceptable for international organizations to link their financial assistance to poorer
countries with the introduction of laws that establish “marriage” between persons of the same sex.
The Transmission of Life and the Challenges of a Declining Birthrate
Today, the diffusion of a mentality that reduces the generation of human life to one variable of
an individual’s or couple’s plans is easily observable. Sometimes, economic factors are
burdensome, contributing to a sharp drop in the birthrate that weakens the social fabric,
compromises relations between generations and renders a future outlook more uncertain.
Openness to life is an intrinsic requirement of married love. In this regard, the Church supports
families who accept, raise and surround with affection children with various disabilities.
Pastoral work in this area needs to start with listening to people and acknowledging the beauty
and truth of an unconditional openness to life, which is needed, if human love is to be lived fully.
This serves as the basis for an appropriate teaching regarding the natural methods for responsible
procreation, which allow a couple to live, in a harmonious and conscious manner, the loving
communication between husband and wife in all its aspects along with their responsibility at
procreating life. In this regard, we should return to the message of the Encyclical Humanae Vitaeof
Blessed Pope Paul VI, which highlights the need to respect the dignity of the person in morally
assessing methods in regulating births. The adoption of children, orphans and the abandoned and
accepting them as one’s own is a specific form of the family apostolate,
and has oftentimes been called for and encouraged by the Magisterium.
The choice of adoption or foster parenting
expresses a particular fruitfulness of married life, not simply in the case of sterility. Such a choice is
a powerful sign of family love and an occasion to witness to one’s faith and to restore the dignity of
a son or daughter to a person who has been deprived of this dignity.
Affectivity needs assistance, also in marriage, as a path to maturity in the ever-deepening
acceptance of the other and an ever-fuller gift of self, in this sense, the necessity of offering
programs of formation that nourish married life and the importance of the laity, providing an
accompaniment that consists in a vibrant witness, was reiterated. Undoubtedly, the example of a
faithful and deep love is of great assistance; a love shown in tenderness and respect; a love that is
capable of growing over time; and a love that, in the very act of opening itself to the generation of
life, gives an experience of a mystery that transcends us.
Upbringing and the Role of the Family in Evangelization
One of the fundamental challenges facing families today is undoubtedly that of raising children,
made all the more difficult and complex by today’s cultural reality and the great influence of the
media. Consideration, then, needs to be given to the needs and expectations of families, capable
of being places of growth in daily life, places of a concrete and essential transmission of the virtues
that give form to our existence. Parents, then, are able freely to choose the type of education for
their children, according to their convictions.
The Church assumes a valuable role in supporting families, starting with Christian Initiation, by
being welcoming communities. More than ever, these communities today are to offer support to
parents, in complex situations and everyday life, in their work of raising their children,
accompanying children, adolescents and young people in their development through personalized
pastoral programs, capable of introducing them to the full meaning of life and encouraging them
in their choices and responsibilities, lived in the light of the Gospel. Mary, in her tenderness, mercy
and maternal sensitivity can nourish the hunger of humanity and life itself. Therefore, families and
the Christian people should seek her intercession. Pastoral work and Marian devotion are an
appropriate starting point for proclaiming the Gospel of the Family.
Conclusion
These proposed reflections, the fruit of the synodal work that took place in great freedom and
with a spirit of reciprocal listening, are intended to raise questions and indicate points of view that
will later be developed and clarified through reflection in the local Churches in the intervening year
leading to the XIV Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops, scheduled for October
2015 to treat The Vocation and Mission of the Family in the Church and in the Contemporary
World. These are not decisions taken nor are they easy subjects. Nevertheless, in the collegial
journey of the bishops and with the involvement of all God’s people, the Holy Spirit will guide us in
finding the road to truth and mercy for all. This has been the wish of Pope Francis from the
beginning of our work, when he invited us to be courageous in faith and humbly and honestly to
embrace the truth in charity.
