"The word of the lord abides for ever." This word is the Gospel which was
preached to you” (1 Pet 1:25; cf. Is 40:8). With this assertion from the First Letter of Saint Peter,
which takes up the words of the Prophet Isaiah, we find ourselves before the mystery of God, who
has made himself known through the gift of his word. This word, which abides for ever, entered
into time. God spoke his eternal Word humanly; his Word “became flesh” (Jn 1:14). This is the
good news. This is the proclamation which has come down the centuries to us today. The Twelfth
Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops, meeting in the Vatican from 5-26 October
2008, had as its theme: The Word of God in the Life and Mission of the Church. It was a profound
experience of encounter with Christ, the Word of the Father, who is present where two or three are
gathered in his name (cf. Mt 18:20). With this Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation I readily respond
to the request of the Synod Fathers to make known to the whole People of God the rich fruits
which emerged from the synodal sessions and the recommendations which resulted from our
common endeavour.[1] Consequently, I intend to revisit the work of the Synod in the light of its
documents: the Lineamenta, the Instrumentum Laboris, the Relationes ante and post
disceptationem, the texts of the interventions, both those delivered on the Synod floor and those
presented in written form, the reports of the smaller discussion groups, the Final Message to the
People of God and, above all, a number of specific proposals (Propositiones) which the Fathers
considered especially significant. In this way I wish to point out certain fundamental approaches to
a rediscovery of God’s word in the life of the Church as a wellspring of constant renewal. At the
same time I express my hope that the word will be ever more fully at the heart of every ecclesial
activity.That our joy may be complete2. Before all else, I would like to call to mind the beauty and
pleasure of the renewed encounter with the Lord Jesus which we experienced during the synodal
assembly. In union with with the Synod Fathers, then, I address all the faithful in the words of Saint
John in his first letter: “We proclaim to you the eternal life which was with the Father and which
was made manifest to us – that which we have seen and heard we proclaim also to you, so that
you may have fellowship with us; and our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus
Christ” (1 Jn 1:2-3). The Apostle speaks to us of hearing, seeing, touching and looking upon (cf. 1
Jn 1:1) the word of life, since life itself was made manifest in Christ. Called to communion with
God and among ourselves, we must proclaim this gift. From this kerygmatic standpoint, the
synodal assembly was a testimony, before the Church and before the world, to the immense
beauty of encountering the word of God in the communion of the Church. For this reason I
encourage all the faithful to renew their personal and communal encounter with Christ, the word of
life made visible, and to become his heralds, so that the gift of divine life – communion – can
spread ever more fully throughout the world. Indeed, sharing in the life of God, a Trinity of love, is
complete joy (cf. 1 Jn 1:4). And it is the Church’s gift and unescapable duty to communicate that
joy, born of an encounter with the person of Christ, the Word of God in our midst. In a world which
often feels that God is superfluous or extraneous, we confess with Peter that he alone has “the
words of eternal life” (Jn 6:68). There is no greater priority than this: to enable the people of our
time once more to encounter God, the God who speaks to us and shares his love so that we might
4
have life in abundance (cf. Jn 10:10).From “Dei Verbum” to the Synod on the Word of God3. With
the Twelfth Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops on the Word of God, we were
conscious of dealing in a certain sense with the very heart of the Christian life, in continuity with
the previous synodal assembly on The Eucharist as the Source and Summit of the Church’s Life
and Mission. Indeed, the Church is built upon the word of God; she is born from and lives by that
word.[2] Throughout its history, the People of God has always found strength in the word of God,
and today too the ecclesial community grows by hearing, celebrating and studying that word. It
must be acknowledged that in recent decades ecclesial life has grown more sensitive to this
theme, particularly with reference to Christian revelation, the living Tradition and sacred Scripture.
Beginning with the pontificate of Pope Leo XIII, we can say that there has been a crescendo of
interventions aimed at an increased awareness of the importance of the word of God and the
study of the Bible in the life of the Church,[3] culminating in the Second Vatican Council and
specifically in the promulgation of the Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation Dei Verbum.
The latter represented a milestone in the Church’s history: “The Synod Fathers … acknowledge
with gratitude the great benefits which this document brought to the life of the Church, on the
exegetical, theological, spiritual, pastoral and ecumenical plane”.[4] The intervening years have
also witnessed a growing awareness of the “trinitarian and salvation-historical horizon of
revelation”[5] against which Jesus Christ is to be acknowledged as “mediator and fullness of all
revelation”.[6] To each generation the Church unceasingly proclaims that Christ “completed and
perfected revelation. Everything to do with his presence and his self-manifestation was involved in
achieving this: his words and works, signs and miracles, but above all his death and resurrection
from the dead, and finally his sending of the Spirit of truth”.[7]Everyone is aware of the great
impulse which the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum gave to the revival of interest in the word of
God in the life of the Church, to theological reflection on divine revelation and to the study of
sacred Scripture. In the last forty years, the Church’s magisterium has also issued numerous
statements on these questions.[8] By celebrating this Synod, the Church, conscious of her
continuing journey under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, felt called to further reflection on the
theme of God’s word, in order to review the implementation of the Council’s directives, and to
confront the new challenges which the present time sets before Christian believers.The Synod of
Bishops on the Word of God4. In the twelfth synodal assembly, Bishops from throughout the world
gathered around the word of God and symbolically placed the text of the Bible at the centre of the
assembly, in order to stress anew something we risk taking for granted in everyday life: the fact
that God speaks and responds to our questions.[9] Together we listened to and celebrated the
word of the Lord. We recounted to one another all that the Lord is doing in the midst of the People
of God, and we shared our hopes and concerns. All this made us realize that we can deepen our
relationship with the word of God only within the “we” of the Church, in mutual listening and
acceptance. Hence our gratitude for the testimonies about the life of the Church in different parts
of the world which emerged from the various interventions on the floor. It was also moving to hear
the fraternal delegates, who accepted our invitation to take part in the synodal meeting. I think in
particular of the meditation offered to us by His Holiness Bartholomaios I, Ecumenical Patriarch of
Constantinople, for which the Fathers expressed deep appreciation.[10] Furthermore, for the first
5
time ever, the Synod of Bishops also invited a rabbi to offer us a precious witness on the Hebrew
Scriptures, which are also part of our own sacred Scriptures.[11]In this way we were able to
acknowledge with joy and gratitude that “in the Church there is also a Pentecost today – in other
words, the Church speaks in many tongues, and not only outwardly, in the sense that all the great
languages of the world are represented in her, but, more profoundly, inasmuch as present within
her are various ways of experiencing God and the world, a wealth of cultures, and only in this way
do we come to see the vastness of the human experience and, as a result, the vastness of the
word of God”.[12] We were also able to see an ongoing Pentecost; various peoples are still waiting
for the word of God to be proclaimed in their own language and in their own culture.How can I fail
to mention that throughout the Synod we were accompanied by the testimony of the Apostle Paul!
It was providential that the Twelfth Ordinary General Assembly took place during the year
dedicated to the great Apostle of the Nations on the two thousandth anniversary of his birth. Paul’s
life was completely marked by his zeal for the spread of God’s word. How can we not be moved by
his stirring words about his mission as a preacher of the word of God: “I do everything for the
Gospel” (1 Cor 9:23); or, as he writes in the Letter to the Romans: “I am not ashamed of the
Gospel; it is the power of God for salvation to every one who has faith” (1:16). Whenever we
reflect on the word of God in the life and mission of the Church, we cannot but think of Saint Paul
and his life spent in spreading the message of salvation in Christ to all peoples.The Prologue of
John’s Gospel as a guide5. With this Apostolic Exhortation I would like the work of the Synod to
have a real effect on the life of the Church: on our personal relationship with the sacred Scriptures,
on their interpretation in the liturgy and catechesis, and in scientific research, so that the Bible may
not be simply a word from the past, but a living and timely word. To accomplish this, I would like to
present and develop the labours of the Synod by making constant reference to the Prologue of
John’s Gospel (Jn 1:1-18), which makes known to us the basis of our life: the Word, who from the
beginning is with God, who became flesh and who made his dwelling among us (cf. Jn 1:14). This
is a magnificent text, one which offers a synthesis of the entire Christian faith. From his personal
experience of having met and followed Christ, John, whom tradition identifies as “the disciple
whom Jesus loved” (Jn 13:23; 20:2; 21:7, 20), “came to a deep certainty: Jesus is the Wisdom of
God incarnate, he is his eternal Word who became a mortal man”.[13] May John, who “saw and
believed” (cf. Jn 20:8) also help us to lean on the breast of Christ (cf. Jn 13:25), the source of the
blood and water (cf. Jn 19:34) which are symbols of the Church’s sacraments. Following the
example of the Apostle John and the other inspired authors, may we allow ourselves to be led by
the Holy Spirit to an ever greater love of the word of God. PART ONEVERBUM DEI“In the
beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God…
and the Word became flesh”
(Jn 1:1, 14)The God Who Speaks God in dialogue6. The novelty of biblical revelation consists in
the fact that God becomes known through the dialogue which he desires to have with us.[14] The
Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum had expressed this by acknowledging that the unseen God
“from the fullness of his love, addresses men and women as his friends, and lives among them, in
6
order to invite and receive them into his own company”.[15] Yet we would not yet sufficiently grasp
the message of the Prologue of Saint John if we stopped at the fact that God enters into loving
communion with us. In reality, the Word of God, through whom “all things were made” (Jn 1:3) and
who “became flesh” (Jn 1:14), is the same Word who is “in the beginning” (Jn 1:1). If we realize
that this is an allusion to the beginning of the book of Genesis (cf. Gen 1:1), we find ourselves
faced with a beginning which is absolute and which speaks to us of the inner life of God. The
Johannine Prologue makes us realize that the Logos is truly eternal, and from eternity is himself
God. God was never without his Logos. The Word exists before creation. Consequently at the
heart of the divine life there is communion, there is absolute gift. “God is love” (1 Jn 4:16), as the
same Apostle tells us elsewhere, thus pointing to “the Christian image of God and the resulting
image of mankind and its destiny”.[16] God makes himself known to us as a mystery of infinite
love in which the Father eternally utters his Word in the Holy Spirit. Consequently the Word, who
from the beginning is with God and is God, reveals God himself in the dialogue of love between
the divine persons, and invites us to share in that love. Created in the image and likeness of the
God who is love, we can thus understand ourselves only in accepting the Word and in docility to
the work of the Holy Spirit. In the light of the revelation made by God’s Word, the enigma of the
human condition is definitively clarified.The analogy of the word of God7. In the light of these
considerations, born of meditation on the Christian mystery expressed in the Prologue of John, we
now need to consider what the Synod Fathers affirmed about the different ways in which we speak
of “the word of God”. They rightly referred to a symphony of the word, to a single word expressed
in multiple ways: “a polyphonic hymn”.[17] The Synod Fathers pointed out that human language
operates analogically in speaking of the word of God. In effect, this expression, while referring to
God’s self-communication, also takes on a number of different meanings which need to be
carefully considered and related among themselves, from the standpoint both of theological
reflection and pastoral practice. As the Prologue of John clearly shows us, the Logos refers in the
first place to the eternal Word, the only Son, begotten of the Father before all ages and
consubstantial with him: the word was with God, and the word was God. But this same Word,
Saint John tells us, “became flesh” (Jn 1:14); hence Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, is truly
the Word of God who has become consubstantial with us. Thus the expression “word of God” here
refers to the person of Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of the Father, made man.While the Christ
event is at the heart of divine revelation, we also need to realize that creation itself, the liber
naturae, is an essential part of this symphony of many voices in which the one word is spoken. We
also profess our faith that God has spoken his word in salvation history; he has made his voice
heard; by the power of his Spirit “he has spoken through the prophets”.[18] God’s word is thus
spoken throughout the history of salvation, and most fully in the mystery of the incarnation, death
and resurrection of the Son of God. Then too, the word of God is that word preached by the
Apostles in obedience to the command of the Risen Jesus: “Go into all the world and preach the
Gospel to the whole creation” (Mk 16:15). The word of God is thus handed on in the Church’s
living Tradition. Finally, the word of God, attested and divinely inspired, is sacred Scripture, the
Old and New Testaments. All this helps us to see that, while in the Church we greatly venerate the
sacred Scriptures, the Christian faith is not a “religion of the book”: Christianity is the “religion of
7
the word of God”, not of “a written and mute word, but of the incarnate and living Word”.[19]
Consequently the Scripture is to be proclaimed, heard, read, received and experienced as the
word of God, in the stream of the apostolic Tradition from which it is inseparable.[20]As the Synod
Fathers stated, the expression “word of God” is used analogically, and we should be aware of this.
The faithful need to be better helped to grasp the different meanings of the expression, but also to
understand its unitary sense. From the theological standpoint too, there is a need for further study
of how the different meanings of this expression are interrelated, so that the unity of God’s plan
and, within it, the centrality of the person of Christ, may shine forth more clearly.[21]The cosmic
dimension of the word8. When we consider the basic meaning of the word of God as a reference
to the eternal Word of God made flesh, the one Saviour and mediator between God and
humanity,[22] and we listen to
this word, we are led by the biblical revelation to see that it is the foundation of all reality. The
Prologue of Saint John says of the divine Logos, that “all things were made through him, and
without
him was not anything made that was made” (Jn 1:3); and in the Letter to the Colossians it is said
of Christ, “the first-born of all creation” (1:15), that “all things were created through him and for
him” (1:16). The author of the Letter to the Hebrews likewise states that “by faith we understand
that the world was created by the word of God, so that what is seen was made out of things which
do not appear” (11:3).For us, this proclamation is a word of freedom. Scripture tells us that
everything that exists does not exist by chance but is willed by God and part of his plan, at whose
center is the invitation to partake, in Christ, in the divine life. Creation is born of the Logos and
indelibly bears the mark of the creative Reason which orders and directs it; with joy-filled certainty
the psalms sing: “By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and all their host by the breath
of his mouth” (Ps 33:6); and again, “he spoke, and it came to be; he commanded, and it stood
forth” (Ps 33:9). All reality expresses this mystery: “The heavens are telling the glory of God; and
the firmament proclaims his handiwork” (Ps 19:1). Thus sacred Scripture itself invites us to
acknowledge the Creator by contemplating his creation (cf. Wis 13:5; Rom 1:19-20). The tradition
of Christian thought has developed this key element of the symphony of the word, as when, for
example, Saint Bonaventure, who in the great tradition of the Greek Fathers sees all the
possibilities of creation present in the Logos,[23] states that “every creature is a word of God,
since it proclaims God”.[24] The Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum synthesized this datum when
it stated that “God, who creates and conserves all things by his word (cf. Jn 1:3), provides
constant evidence of himself in created realities”.[25]The creation of man9. Reality, then is born of
the word, as creatura Verbi, and everything is called to serve the word. Creation is the setting in
which the entire history of the love between God and his creation develops; hence human
salvation is the reason underlying everything. Contemplating the cosmos from the perspective of
salvation history, we come to realize the unique and singular position occupied by man in creation:
“God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him: male and female he
created them” (Gen 1:27). This enables us to acknowledge fully the precious gifts received from
the Creator: the value of our body, the gift of reason, freedom and conscience. Here too we
discover what the philosophical tradition calls “the natural law”.[26] In effect, “every human being
8
who comes to consciousness and to responsibility has the experience of an inner call to do
good”[27] and thus to avoid evil. As Saint Thomas Aquinas says, this principle is the basis of all
the other precepts of the natural law.[28] Listening to the word of God leads us first and foremost
to value the need to live in accordance with this law “written on human hearts” (cf. Rom 2:15;
7:23).[29] Jesus Christ then gives mankind the new law, the law of the Gospel, which takes up and
eminently fulfils the natural law, setting us free from the law of sin, as a result of which, as Saint
Paul says, “I can will what is right, but I cannot do it” (Rom 7:18). It likewise enables men and
women, through grace, to share in the divine life and to overcome their selfishness.[30]The
realism of the word10. Those who know God’s word also know fully the significance of each
creature. For if all things “hold together” in the one who is “before all things” (cf. Col 1:17), then
those who build their lives on his word build in a truly sound and lasting way. The word of God
makes us change our concept of realism: the realist is the one who recognizes in the word of God
the foundation of all things.[31] This realism is particularly needed in our own time, when many
things in which we trust for building our lives, things in which we are tempted to put our hopes,
prove ephemeral. Possessions, pleasure and power show themselves sooner or later to be
incapable of fulfilling the deepest yearnings of the human heart. In building our lives we need solid
foundations which will endure when human certainties fail. Truly, since “for ever, O Lord, your
word is firmly fixed in the heavens” and the faithfulness of the Lord “endures to all generations” (Ps
119:89-90), whoever builds on this word builds the house of his life on rock (cf. Mt 7:24). May our
heart be able to say to God each day: “You are my refuge and my shield; I hope in your word” (Ps
119:114), and, like Saint Peter, may we entrust ourselves in our daily actions to the Lord Jesus:
“At your word I will let down the nets” (Lk 5:5).Christology of the word11. From this glimpse at all
reality as the handiwork of the Blessed Trinity through the divine Word, we can understand the
statement made by the author of the Letter to the Hebrews: “in many and various ways God spoke
of old to our fathers by the prophets; but in these last days he has spoken to us by a Son, whom
he appointed the heir of all things, through whom also he created the world” (1:1-2). It is very
beautiful to see how the entire Old Testament already appears to us as a history in which God
communicates his word: indeed, “by his covenant with Abraham (cf. Gen 15:18) and, through
Moses, with the race of Israel (cf. Ex 24:8), he gained a people for himself, and to them he
revealed himself in words and deeds as the one, living and true God. It was his plan that Israel
might learn by experience God’s ways with humanity and, by listening to the voice of God
speaking to them through the prophets, might gradually understand his ways more fully and more
clearly, and make them more widely known among the nations (cf. Ps 21:28-29; 95:1-3; Is 2:1-4;
Jer 3:17)”.[32]This “condescension” of God is accomplished surpassingly in the incarnation of the
Word. The eternal Word, expressed in creation and communicated in salvation history, in Christ
became a man, “born of woman” (Gal 4:4). Here the word finds expression not primarily in
discourse, concepts or rules. Here we are set before the very person of Jesus. His unique and
singular history is the definitive word which God speaks to humanity. We can see, then, why
“being Christian is not the result of an ethical choice or a lofty idea, but the encounter with an
event, a person, which gives life a new horizon and a definitive direction”.[33] The constant
renewal of this encounter and this awareness fills the hearts of believers with amazement at God’s
9
initiative, which human beings, with our own reason and imagination, could never have dreamt of.
We are speaking of an unprecedented and humanly inconceivable novelty: “the word became
flesh and dwelt among us” (Jn 1:14a). These words are no figure of speech; they point to a lived
experience! Saint John, an eyewitness, tells us so: “We have beheld his glory, glory as of the only
Son from the Father, full of grace and truth” (Jn 1:14b). The apostolic faith testifies that the eternal
Word became one of us. The divine Word is truly expressed in human words.12. The patristic and
medieval tradition, in contemplating this “Christology of the word”, employed an evocative
expression: the word was “abbreviated”.[34] “The Fathers of the Church found in their Greek
translation of the Old Testament a passage from the prophet Isaiah that Saint Paul also quotes in
order to show how God’s new ways had already been foretold in the Old Testament. There we
read: 'The Lord made his word short, he abbreviated it' (Is 10:23; Rom 9:28) … The Son himself is
the Word, the Logos: the eternal word became small – small enough to fit into a manger. He
became a child, so that the word could be grasped by us”.[35] Now the word is not simply audible;
not only does it have a voice, now the word has a face, one which we can see: that of Jesus of
Nazareth.[36]Reading the Gospel accounts, we see how Jesus’ own humanity appears in all its
uniqueness precisely with regard to the word of God. In his perfect humanity he does the will of
the Father at all times; Jesus hears his voice and obeys it with his entire being; he knows the
Father and he keeps his word (cf. Jn 8:55); he speaks to us of what the Father has told him (cf. Jn
12:50); I have given them the words which you gave me” (Jn 17:8). Jesus thus shows that he is
the divine Logos which is given to us, but at the same time the new Adam, the true man, who
unfailingly does not his own will but that of the Father. He “increased in wisdom and in stature, and
in favour with God and man” (Lk 2:52). In a perfect way, he hears, embodies and communicates to
us the word of God (cf. Lk 5:1).Jesus’ mission is ultimately fulfilled in the paschal mystery: here we
find ourselves before the “word of the cross” (1 Cor 1:18). The word is muted; it becomes mortal
silence, for it has “spoken” exhaustively, holding back nothing of what it had to tell us. The Fathers
of the Church, in pondering this mystery, attributed to the Mother of God this touching phrase:
“Wordless is the Word of the Father, who made every creature which speaks, lifeless are the eyes
of the one at whose word and whose nod all living things move”.[37] Here that “greater” love, the
love which gives its life for its friends (cf. Jn 15:13), is truly shared with us.In this great mystery
Jesus is revealed as the word of the new and everlasting covenant: divine freedom and human
freedom have definitively met in his crucified flesh, in an indissoluble and eternally valid compact.
Jesus himself, at the Last Supper, in instituting the Eucharist, had spoken of a “new and
everlasting covenant” in the outpouring of his blood (cf. Mt 26:28; Mk 14:24; Lk 22:20), and shows
himself to be the true sacrificial Lamb who brings about our definitive liberation from slavery.[38]In
the most luminous mystery of the resurrection, this silence of the word is shown in its authentic
and definitive meaning. Christ, the incarnate, crucified and risen Word of God, is Lord of all things;
he is the victor, the Pantocrator, and so all things are gathered up forever in him (cf. Eph 1:10).
Christ is thus “the light of the world” (Jn 8:12), the light which “shines in the darkness” (Jn 1:5) and
which the darkness has not overcome (cf. Jn 1:5). Here we come to understand fully the meaning
of the words of Psalm 119: “Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path” (v. 105); the
risen Word is this definitive light to our path. From the beginning, Christians realized that in Christ
10
the word of God is present as a person. The word of God is the true light which men and women
need. In the resurrection the Son of God truly emerged as the light of the world. Now, by living with
him and in him, we can live in the light.13. Here, at the heart, as it were, of the “Christology of the
word”, it is important to stress the unity of the divine plan in the incarnate Word: the New
Testament thus presents the paschal mystery as being in accordance with the sacred Scriptures
and as their deepest fulfillment. Saint Paul, in the First Letter to the Corinthians, states that Jesus
Christ died for our sins “in accordance with the Scriptures” (15:3) and that he rose on the third day
“in accordance with the Scriptures” (15:4). The Apostle thus relates the event of the Lord’s death
and resurrection to the history of the Old Covenant of God with his people. Indeed, he shows us
that from that event history receives its inner logic and its true meaning. In the paschal mystery
“the words of Scripture” are fulfilled; in other words, this death which took place “in accordance
with the Scriptures” is an event containing a logos, an inner logic: the death of Christ testifies that
the word of God became thoroughly human “flesh”, human “history”.[39] Similarly, the resurrection
of Jesus takes place “on the third day in accordance with the Scriptures”: since Jewish belief held
that decay set in after the third day, the word of Scripture is fulfilled in Jesus who rises incorrupt.
Thus Saint Paul, faithfully handing on the teaching of the Apostles (cf. 1 Cor 15:3), stresses that
Christ’s victory over death took place through the creative power of the word of God. This divine
power brings hope and joy: this, in a word, is the liberating content of the paschal revelation. At
Easter, God reveals himself and the power of the trinitarian love which shatters the baneful powers
of evil and death.Calling to mind these essential elements of our faith, we can contemplate the
profound unity in Christ between creation, the new creation and all salvation history. To use an
example, we can compare the cosmos to a “book” – Galileo himself used this example – and
consider it as “the work of an author who expresses himself through the ‘symphony’ of creation. In
this symphony one finds, at a certain point, what would be called in musical terms a ‘solo’, a theme
entrusted to a single instrument or voice which is so important that the meaning of the entire work
depends on it. This ‘solo’ is Jesus. … The Son of Man recapitulates in himself earth and heaven,
creation and the Creator, flesh and Spirit. He is the centre of the cosmos and of history, for in him
converge without confusion the author and his work”.[40]The eschatological dimension of the word
of God14. In all of this, the Church gives voice to her awareness that with Jesus Christ she stands
before the definitive word of God: he is “the first and the last” (Rev 1:17). He has given creation
and history their definitive meaning; and hence we are called to live in time and in God’s creation
within this eschatological rhythm of the word; “thus the Christian dispensation, since it is the new
and definitive covenant, will never pass away; and no new public revelation is to be expected
before the glorious manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ (cf. 1 Tim 6:14 and Tit 2:13)”.[41]
Indeed, as the Fathers noted during the Synod, the “uniqueness of Christianity is manifested in the
event which is Jesus Christ, the culmination of revelation, the fulfilment of God’s promises and the
mediator of the encounter between man and God. He who ‘has made God known’ (Jn 1:18) is the
one, definitive word given to mankind”.[42] Saint John of the Cross expresses this truth
magnificently: “Since he has given us his Son, his only word (for he possesses no other), he spoke
everything at once in this sole word – and he has no more to say… because what he spoke before
to the prophets in parts, he has spoken all at once by giving us this All who is his Son. Any person
11
questioning God or desiring some vision or revelation would be guilty not only of foolish behaviour
but also of offending him, by not fixing his eyes entirely on Christ and by living with the desire for
some other novelty”.[43]Consequently the Synod pointed to the need to “help the faithful to
distinguish the word of God from private revelations”[44] whose role “is not to ‘complete’ Christ’s
definitive revelation, but to help live more fully by it in a certain period of history”.[45] The value of
private revelations is essentially different from that of the one public revelation: the latter demands
faith; in it God himself speaks to us through human words and the mediation of the living
community of the Church. The criterion for judging the truth of a private revelation is its orientation
to Christ himself. If it leads us away from him, then it certainly does not come from the Holy Spirit,
who guides us more deeply into the Gospel, and not away from it. Private revelation is an aid to
this faith, and it demonstrates its credibility precisely because it refers back to the one public
revelation. Ecclesiastical approval of a private revelation essentially means that its message
contains nothing contrary to faith and morals; it is licit to make it public and the faithful are
authorized to give to it their prudent adhesion. A private revelation can introduce new emphases,
give rise to new forms of piety, or deepen older ones. It can have a certain prophetic character (cf.
1 Th 5:19-21) and can be a valuable aid for better understanding and living the Gospel at a certain
time; consequently it should not be treated lightly. It is a help which is proffered, but its use is not
obligatory. In any event, it must be a matter of nourishing faith, hope and love, which are for
everyone the permanent path of salvation.[46]The word of God and the Holy Spirit15. After
reflecting on God’s final and definitive word to the world, we need now to mention the mission of
the Holy Spirit in relation to the divine word. In fact there can be no authentic understanding of
Christian revelation apart from the activity of the Paraclete. This is due to the fact that God’s selfcommunication always involves the relationship of the Son and the Holy Spirit, whom Irenaeus of
Lyons refers to as “the two hands of the Father”.[47] Sacred Scripture itself speaks of the
presence of the Holy Spirit in salvation history and particularly in the life of Jesus: he was
conceived of the Virgin Mary by the power of the Holy Spirit (cf. Mt 1:18; Lk 1:35); at the beginning
of his public mission, on the banks of the Jordan, he sees the Holy Spirit descend on him in the
form of a dove (cf. Mt 3:16); in this same Spirit Jesus acts, speaks and rejoices (cf. Lk 10:21); and
in the Spirit he offers himself up (cf. Heb 9:14). As his mission draws to an end, according to the
account of Saint John, Jesus himself clearly relates the giving of his life to the sending of the Spirit
upon those who belong to him (cf. Jn 16:7). The Risen Jesus, bearing in his flesh the signs of the
passion, then pours out the Spirit (cf. Jn 20:22), making his disciples sharers in his own mission
(cf. Jn 20:21). The Holy Spirit was to teach the disciples all things and bring to their remembrance
all that Christ had said (cf. Jn 14:26), since he, the Spirit of Truth (cf. Jn 15:26) will guide the
disciples into all the truth (cf. Jn 16:13). Finally, in the Acts of the Apostles, we read that the Spirit
descended on the Twelve gathered in prayer with Mary on the day of Pentecost (cf. 2:1-4), and
impelled them to take up the mission of proclaiming to all peoples the Good News.[48]The word of
God is thus expressed in human words thanks to the working of the Holy Spirit. The missions of
the Son and the Holy Spirit are inseparable and constitute a single economy of salvation. The
same Spirit who acts in the incarnation of the Word in the womb of the Virgin Mary is the Spirit
who guides Jesus throughout his mission and is promised to the disciples. The same Spirit who
12
spoke through the prophets sustains and inspires the Church in her task of proclaiming the word of
God and in the preaching of the Apostles; finally, it is this Spirit who inspires the authors of sacred
Scripture.16. Conscious of this pneumatological horizon, the Synod Fathers highlighted the
importance of the Holy Spirit’s work in the life of the Church and in the hearts of believers in
relation to sacred Scripture:[49] without the efficacious working of the “Spirit of Truth” (Jn 14:16),
the words of the Lord cannot be understood. As Saint Irenaeus states: “Those who do not share in
the Spirit do not draw from the bosom of their mother [the Church] the food of life; they receive
nothing from the purest fountain that flows from the body of Christ”.[50] Just as the word of God
comes to us in the body of Christ, in his Eucharistic body and in the body of the Scriptures,
through the working of the Holy Spirit, so too it can only be truly received and understood through
that same Spirit.The great writers of the Christian tradition speak unanimously of the place of the
Holy Spirit in the relationship which believers are to have with the Scriptures. Saint John
Chrysostom states that Scripture “needs the revelation of the Spirit, so that by discovering the true
meaning of the things enclosed therein, we can reap abundant benefits”.[51] Saint Jerome is
likewise firmly convinced that “we cannot come to an understanding of Scripture without the
assistance of the Holy Spirit who inspired it”.[52] Saint Gregory the Great nicely emphasizes the
work of the Spirit in the formation and interpretation of the Bible: “He himself created the words of
the holy Testaments, he himself revealed their meaning”.[53] Richard of Saint Victor points out
that we need “the eyes of doves”, enlightened and taught by the Spirit, in order to understand the
sacred text.[54]Here too I would like to emphasize the very significant witness to the relationship
between the Holy Spirit and Scripture which we find in the texts of the liturgy, where the word of
God is proclaimed, heard and explained to the faithful. We find a witness to this in the ancient
prayers which in the form of an epiclesis invoke the Spirit before the proclamation of the readings:
“Send your Paraclete Spirit into our hearts and make us understand the Scriptures which he has
inspired; and grant that I may interpret them worthily, so that the faithful assembled here may profit
thereby”. We also find prayers which, at the end of the homily, again ask God to send the gift of
the Spirit upon the faithful: “God our Saviour… we implore you for this people: send upon them the
Holy Spirit; may the Lord Jesus come to visit them, speak to the minds of all, dispose their hearts
to faith and lead our souls to you, God of mercies”.[55] This makes it clear that we cannot come to
understand the meaning of the word unless we are open to the working of the Paraclete in the
Church and in the hearts of believers.Tradition and Scripture17. In reaffirming the profound
connection between the Holy Spirit and the word of God, we have also laid the basis for an
understanding of the significance and the decisive value of the living Tradition and the sacred
Scriptures in the Church. Indeed, since God “so loved the world that he gave his only Son” (Jn
3:16), the divine word, spoken in time, is bestowed and “consigned” to the Church in a definitive
way, so that the proclamation of salvation can be communicated effectively in every time and
place. As the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum reminds us, Jesus Christ himself “commanded
the Apostles to preach the Gospel – promised beforehand by the prophets, fulfilled in his own
person and promulgated by his own lips – to all as the source of all saving truth and moral law,
communicating God’s gifts to them. This was faithfully carried out; it was carried out by the
Apostles who handed on, by oral preaching, by their example, by their ordinances, what they
13
themselves had received – whether from the lips of Christ, from his way of life and his works, or by
coming to know it through the prompting of the Holy Spirit; it was carried out by those Apostles
and others associated with them who, under the inspiration of the same Holy Spirit, committed the
message of salvation to writing”.[56]The Second Vatican Council also states that this Tradition of
apostolic origin is a living and dynamic reality: it “makes progress in the Church, with the help of
the Holy Spirit”; yet not in the sense that it changes in its truth, which is perennial. Rather, “there is
a growth in insight into the realities and the words that are being passed on”, through
contemplation and study, with the understanding granted by deeper spiritual experience and by
the “preaching of those who, on succeeding to the office of bishop, have received the sure charism
of truth”.[57]The living Tradition is essential for enabling the Church to grow through time in the
understanding of the truth revealed in the Scriptures; indeed, “by means of the same tradition, the
full canon of the sacred books is known to the Church and the holy Scriptures themselves are
more thoroughly understood and constantly made effective in the Church”.[58] Ultimately, it is the
living Tradition of the Church which makes us adequately understand sacred Scripture as the word
of God. Although the word of God precedes and exceeds sacred Scripture, nonetheless Scripture,
as inspired by God, contains the divine word (cf. 2 Tim 3:16) “in an altogether singular
way”.[59]18. We see clearly, then, how important it is for the People of God to be properly taught
and trained to approach the sacred Scriptures in relation to the Church’s living Tradition, and to
recognize in them the very word of God. Fostering such an approach in the faithful is very
important from the standpoint of the spiritual life. Here it might be helpful to recall the analogy
drawn by the Fathers of the Church between the word of God which became “flesh” and the word
which became a “book”.[60] The Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum takes up this ancient tradition
which holds, as Saint Ambrose says,[61] that “the body of the Son is the Scripture which we have
received”, and declares that “the words of God, expressed in human language, are in every way
like human speech, just as the word of the eternal Father, when he took on himself the weak flesh
of human beings, became like them”.[62] When understood in this way, sacred Scripture presents
itself to us, in the variety of its many forms and content, as a single reality. Indeed, “through all the
words of sacred Scripture, God speaks only one single word, his one utterance, in whom he
expresses himself completely (cf. Heb 1:1-3)”.[63] Saint Augustine had already made the point
clearly: “Remember that one alone is the discourse of God which unfolds in all sacred Scripture,
and one alone is the word which resounds on the lips of all the holy writers”.[64]In short, by the
work of the Holy Spirit and under the guidance of the magisterium, the Church hands on to every
generation all that has been revealed in Christ. The Church lives in the certainty that her Lord, who
spoke in the past, continues today to communicate his word in her living Tradition and in sacred
Scripture. Indeed, the word of God is given to us in sacred Scripture as an inspired testimony to
revelation; together with the Church’s living Tradition, it constitutes the supreme rule of
faith.[65]Sacred Scripture, inspiration and truth19. A key concept for understanding the sacred text
as the word of God in human words is certainly that of inspiration. Here too we can suggest an
analogy: as the word of God became flesh by the power of the Holy Spirit in the womb of the
Virgin Mary, so sacred Scripture is born from the womb of the Church by the power of the same
Spirit. Sacred Scripture is “the word of God set down in writing under the inspiration of the Holy
14
Spirit”.[66] In this way one recognizes the full importance of the human author who wrote the
inspired texts and, at the same time, God himself as the true author.As the Synod Fathers
affirmed, the theme of inspiration is clearly decisive for an adequate approach to the Scriptures
and their correct interpretation,[67] which for its part is to be done in the same Spirit in whom the
sacred texts were written.[68] Whenever our awareness of its inspiration grows weak, we risk
reading Scripture as an object of historical curiosity and not as the work of the Holy Spirit in which
we can hear the Lord himself speak and recognize his presence in history.The Synod Fathers also
stressed the link between the theme of inspiration and that of the truth of the Scriptures.[69] A
deeper study of the process of inspiration will doubtless lead to a greater understanding of the
truth contained in the sacred books. As the Council’s teaching states in this regard, the inspired
books teach the truth: “since, therefore, all that the inspired authors, or sacred writers, affirm
should be regarded as affirmed by the Holy Spirit, we must acknowledge that the books of
Scripture firmly, faithfully and without error, teach that truth which God, for the sake of our
salvation, wished to see confided to the sacred Scriptures. Thus, ‘all scripture is inspired by God
and is useful for teaching, for reproof, for correction and for training in righteousness, so that the
man of God may be proficient, equipped for every good work’ (2 Tim 3:16-17,
Greek)”.[70]Certainly theological reflection has always considered inspiration and truth as two key
concepts for an ecclesial hermeneutic of the sacred Scriptures. Nonetheless, one must
acknowledge the need today for a fuller and more adequate study of these realities, in order better
to respond to the need to interpret the sacred texts in accordance with their nature. Here I would
express my fervent hope that research in this field will progress and bear fruit both for biblical
science and for the spiritual life of the faithful.God the Father, source and origin of the word20. The
economy of revelation has its beginning and origin in God the Father. By his word “the heavens
were made, and all their host by the breath of his mouth” (Ps 33:6). It is he who has given us “the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ” (2 Cor 4:6; cf. Mt 16:17; Lk 9:29).In
the Son, “Logos made flesh” (cf. Jn 1:14), who came to accomplish the will of the one who sent
him (cf. Jn 4:34), God, the source of revelation, reveals himself as Father and brings to completion
the divine pedagogy which had previously been carried out through the words of the prophets and
the wondrous deeds accomplished in creation and in the history of his people and all mankind.
The revelation of God the Father culminates in the Son’s gift of the Paraclete (cf. Jn 14:16), the
Spirit of the Father and the Son, who guides us “into all the truth” (Jn 16:13).All God’s promises
find their “yes” in Jesus Christ (cf. 2 Cor 1:20). Men and women are thus enabled to set out on the
way that leads to the Father (cf. Jn 14:6), so that in the end “God may be everything to everyone”
(1 Cor 15:28).21. As the cross of Christ demonstrates, God also speaks by his silence. The
silence of God, the experience of the distance of the almighty Father, is a decisive stage in the
earthly journey of the Son of God, the incarnate Word. Hanging from the wood of the cross, he
lamented the suffering caused by that silence: “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
(Mk 15:34; Mt 27:46). Advancing in obedience to his very last breath, in the obscurity of death,
Jesus called upon the Father. He commended himself to him at the moment of passage, through
death, to eternal life: “Father, into your hands I commend my spirit” (Lk 23:46).This experience of
Jesus reflects the situation of all those who, having heard and acknowledged God’s word, must
15
also confront his silence. This has been the experience of countless saints and mystics, and even
today is part of the journey of many believers. God’s silence prolongs his earlier words. In these
moments of darkness, he speaks through the mystery of his silence. Hence, in the dynamic of
Christian revelation, silence appears as an important expression of the word of God.Our
Response To The God Who SpeaksCalled to the covenant with God22. By emphasizing the many
forms of the word, we have been able to contemplate the number of ways in which God speaks to
and encounters men and women, making himself known in dialogue. Certainly, as the Synod
Fathers stated, “dialogue, when we are speaking of revelation, entails the primacy of the word of
God addressed to man”.[71] The mystery of the Covenant expresses this relationship between
God who calls man with his word, and man who responds, albeit making clear that it is not a
matter of a meeting of two peers; what we call the Old and New Covenant is not a contract
between two equal parties, but a pure gift of God. By this gift of his love God bridges every
distance and truly makes us his “partners”, in order to bring about the nuptial mystery of the love
between Christ and the Church. In this vision every man and woman appears as someone to
whom the word speaks, challenges and calls to enter this dialogue of love through a free
response. Each of us is thus enabled by God to hear and respond to his word. We were created in
the word and we live in the word; we cannot understand ourselves unless we are open to this
dialogue. The word of God discloses the filial and relational nature of human existence. We are
indeed called by grace to be conformed to Christ, the Son of the Father, and, in him, to be
transformed.God hears us and responds to our questions23. In this dialogue with God we come to
understand ourselves and we discover an answer to our heart’s deepest questions. The word of
God in fact is not inimical to us; it does not stifle our authentic desires, but rather illuminates them,
purifies them and brings them to fulfilment. How important it is for our time to discover that God
alone responds to the yearning present in the heart of every man and woman! Sad to say, in our
days, and in the West, there is a widespread notion that God is extraneous to people’s lives and
problems, and that his very presence can be a threat to human autonomy. Yet the entire economy
of salvation demonstrates that God speaks and acts in history for our good and our integral
salvation. Thus it is decisive, from the pastoral standpoint, to present the word of God in its
capacity to enter into dialogue with the everyday problems which people face. Jesus himself says
that he came that we might have life in abundance (cf. Jn 10:10). Consequently, we need to make
every effort to share the word of God as an openness to our problems, a response to our
questions, a broadening of our values and the fulfilment of our aspirations. The Church’s pastoral
activity needs to bring out clearly how God listens to our need and our plea for help. As Saint
Bonaventure says in the Breviloquium: “The fruit of sacred Scripture is not any fruit whatsoever,
but the very fullness of eternal happiness. Sacred Scripture is the book containing the words of
eternal life, so that we may not only believe in, but also possess eternal life, in which we will see
and love, and all our desires will be fulfilled”.[72]In dialogue with God through his words24. The
word of God draws each of us into a conversation with the Lord: the God who speaks teaches us
how to speak to him. Here we naturally think of the Book of Psalms, where God gives us words to
speak to him, to place our lives before him, and thus to make life itself a path to God.[73] In the
Psalms we find expressed every possible human feeling set masterfully in the sight of God; joy
16
and pain, distress and hope, fear and trepidation: here all find expression. Along with the Psalms
we think too of the many other passages of sacred Scripture which express our turning to God in
intercessory prayer (cf. Ex 33:12-16), in exultant songs of victory (cf. Ex 15) or in sorrow at the
difficulties experienced in carrying out our mission (cf. Jer 20:7-18). In this way our word to God
becomes God’s word, thus confirming the dialogical nature of all Christian revelation,[74] and our
whole existence becomes a dialogue with the God who speaks and listens, who calls us and gives
direction to our lives. Here the word of God reveals that our entire life is under the divine
call.[75]The word of God and faith25. “‘The obedience of faith’ (Rom 16:26; cf. Rom 1:5; 2 Cor
10:5-6) must be our response to God who reveals. By faith one freely commits oneself entirely to
God, making ‘the full submission of intellect and will to God who reveals’ and willingly assenting to
the revelation given by God”.[76] In these words the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum gave
precise expression to the stance which we must have with regard to God. The proper human
response to the God who speaks is faith. Here we see clearly that “in order to accept revelation,
man must open his mind and heart to the working of the Holy Spirit who enables him to
understand the word of God present in the sacred Scriptures”.[77] It is the preaching of the divine
word, in fact, which gives rise to faith, whereby we give our heartfelt assent to the truth which has
been revealed to us and we commit ourselves entirely to Christ: “faith comes from what is heard,
and what is heard comes from the word of Christ” (Rom 10:17). The whole history of salvation
progressively demonstrates this profound bond between the word of God and the faith which
arises from an encounter with Christ. Faith thus takes shape as an encounter with a person to
whom we entrust our whole life. Christ Jesus remains present today in history, in his body which is
the Church; for this reason our act of faith is at once both personal and ecclesial.Sin as a refusal
to hear the word of God26. The word of God also inevitably reveals the tragic possibility that
human freedom can withdraw from this covenant dialogue with God for which we were created.
The divine word also discloses the sin that lurks in the human heart. Quite frequently in both the
Old and in the New Testament, we find sin described as a refusal to hear the word, as a breaking
of the covenant and thus as being closed to God who calls us to communion with himself.[78]
Sacred Scripture shows how man’s sin is essentially disobedience and refusal to hear. The radical
obedience of Jesus even to his death on the cross (cf. Phil 2:8) completely unmasks this sin. His
obedience brings about the New Covenant between God and man, and grants us the possibility of
reconciliation. Jesus was sent by the Father as a sacrifice of atonement for our sins and for those
of the whole world (cf. 1 Jn 2:2; 4:10; Heb 7:27). We are thus offered the merciful possibility of
redemption and the start of a new life in Christ. For this reason it is important that the faithful be
taught to acknowledge that the root of sin lies in the refusal to hear the word of the Lord, and to
accept in Jesus, the Word of God, the forgiveness which opens us to salvation.Mary, “Mother of
God’s Word” and “Mother of Faith”27. The Synod Fathers declared that the basic aim of the
Twelfth Assembly was “to renew the Church’s faith in the word of God”. To do so, we need to look
to the one in whom the interplay between the word of God and faith was brought to perfection, that
is, to the Virgin Mary, “who by her ‘yes’ to the word of the covenant and her mission, perfectly
fulfills the divine vocation of humanity”.[79] The human reality created through the word finds its
most perfect image in Mary’s obedient faith. From the Annunciation to Pentecost she appears as a
17
woman completely open to the will of God. She is the Immaculate Conception, the one whom God
made “full of grace” (cf. Lk 1:28) and unconditionally docile to his word (cf. Lk 1:38). Her obedient
faith shapes her life at every moment before God’s plan. A Virgin ever attentive to God’s word, she
lives completely attuned to that word; she treasures in her heart the events of her Son, piecing
them together as if in a single mosaic (cf. Lk 2:19,51).[80]In our day the faithful need to be helped
to see more clearly the link between Mary of Nazareth and the faith-filled hearing of God’s word. I
would encourage scholars as well to study the relationship between Mariology and the theology of
the word. This could prove most beneficial both for the spiritual life and for theological and biblical
studies. Indeed, what the understanding of the faith has enabled us to know about Mary stands at
the heart of Christian truth. The incarnation of the word cannot be conceived apart from the
freedom of this young woman who by her assent decisively cooperated with the entrance of the
eternal into time. Mary is the image of the Church in attentive hearing of the word of God, which
took flesh in her. Mary also symbolizes openness to God and others; an active listening which
interiorizes and assimilates, one in which the word becomes a way of life.28. Here I would like to
mention Mary’s familiarity with the word of God. This is clearly evident in the Magnificat. There we
see in some sense how she identifies with the word, enters into it; in this marvellous canticle of
faith, the Virgin sings the praises of the Lord in his own words: “The Magnificat – a portrait, so to
speak, of her soul – is entirely woven from threads of Holy Scripture, threads drawn from the word
of God. Here we see how completely at home Mary is with the word of God, with ease she moves
in and out of it. She speaks and thinks with the word of God; the word of God becomes her word,
and her word issues from the word of God. Here we see how her thoughts are attuned to the
thoughts of God, how her will is one with the will of God. Since Mary is completely imbued with the
word of God, she is able to become the Mother of the Word Incarnate”.[81]Furthermore, in looking
to the Mother of God, we see how God’s activity in the world always engages our freedom,
because through faith the divine word transforms us. Our apostolic and pastoral work can never
be effective unless we learn from Mary how to be shaped by the working of God within us: “devout
and loving attention to the figure of Mary as the model and archetype of the Church’s faith is of
capital importance for bringing about in our day a concrete paradigm shift in the Church’s relation
with the word, both in prayerful listening and in generous commitment to mission and
proclamation”.[82]As we contemplate in the Mother of God a life totally shaped by the word, we
realize that we too are called to enter into the mystery of faith, whereby Christ comes to dwell in
our lives. Every Christian believer, Saint Ambrose reminds us, in some way interiorly conceives
and gives birth to the word of God: even though there is only one Mother of Christ in the flesh, in
the faith Christ is the progeny of us all.[83] Thus, what took place for Mary can daily take place in
each of us, in the hearing of the word and in the celebration of the sacraments.The Interpretation
Of Sacred Scripture
In The ChurchThe Church as the primary setting for biblical hermeneutics29. Another major theme
that emerged during the Synod, to which I would now like to draw attention, is the interpretation of
sacred Scripture in the Church. The intrinsic link between the word and faith makes clear that
authentic biblical hermeneutics can only be had within the faith of the Church, which has its
paradigm in Mary’s fiat. Saint Bonaventure states that without faith there is no key to throw open
18
the sacred text: “This is the knowledge of Jesus Christ, from whom, as from a fountain, flow forth
the certainty and the understanding of all sacred Scripture. Therefore it is impossible for anyone to
attain to knowledge of that truth unless he first have infused faith in Christ, which is the lamp, the
gate and the foundation of all Scripture”.[84] And Saint Thomas Aquinas, citing Saint Augustine,
insists that “the letter, even that of the Gospel, would kill, were there not the inward grace of
healing faith”.[85]Here we can point to a fundamental criterion of biblical hermeneutics: the primary
setting for scriptural interpretation is the life of the Church. This is not to uphold the ecclesial
context as an extrinsic rule to which exegetes must submit, but rather is something demanded by
the very nature of the Scriptures and the way they gradually came into being. “Faith traditions
formed the living context for the literary activity of the authors of sacred Scripture. Their insertion
into this context also involved a sharing in both the liturgical and external life of the communities,
in their intellectual world, in their culture and in the ups and downs of their shared history. In like
manner, the interpretation of sacred Scripture requires full participation on the part of exegetes in
the life and faith of the believing community of their own time”.[86] Consequently, “since sacred
Scripture must be read and interpreted in the light of the same Spirit through whom it was
written”,[87] exegetes, theologians and the whole people of God must approach it as what it really
is, the word of God conveyed to us through human words (cf. 1 Th 2:13). This is a constant datum
implicit in the Bible itself: “No prophecy of scripture is a matter of one’s own interpretation,
because no prophecy ever came by the impulse of man, but men moved by the Holy Spirit spoke
from God” (2 Pet 1:20-21). Moreover, it is the faith of the Church that recognizes in the Bible the
word of God; as Saint Augustine memorably put it: “I would not believe the Gospel, had not the
authority of the Catholic Church led me to do so”.[88] The Holy Spirit, who gives life to the Church,
enables us to interpret the Scriptures authoritatively. The Bible is the Church’s book, and its
essential place in the Church’s life gives rise to its genuine interpretation.30. Saint Jerome recalls
that we can never read Scripture simply on our own. We come up against too many closed doors
and we slip too easily into error. The Bible was written by the People of God for the People of God,
under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Only in this communion with the People of God can we
truly enter as a “we” into the heart of the truth that God himself wishes to convey to us.[89]
Jerome, for whom “ignorance of the Scriptures is ignorance of Christ”,[90] states that the ecclesial
dimension of biblical interpretation is not a requirement imposed from without: the Book is the very
voice of the pilgrim People of God, and only within the faith of this People are we, so to speak,
attuned to understand sacred Scripture. An authentic interpretation of the Bible must always be in
harmony with the faith of the Catholic Church. He thus wrote to a priest: “Remain firmly attached to
the traditional doctrine that you have been taught, so that you may exhort according to sound
doctrine and confound those who contradict it”.[91]Approaches to the sacred text that prescind
from faith might suggest interesting elements on the level of textual structure and form, but would
inevitably prove merely preliminary and structurally incomplete efforts. As the Pontifical Biblical
Commission, echoing an accepted principle of modern hermeneutics, has stated: “access to a
proper understanding of biblical texts is only granted to the person who has an affinity with what
the text is saying on the basis of life experience”.[92] All this brings out more clearly the
relationship between the spiritual life and scriptural hermeneutics. “As the reader matures in the
19
life of the Spirit, so there grows also his or her capacity to understand the realities of which the
Bible speaks”.[93] The intensity of an authentic ecclesial experience can only lead to the growth of
genuine understanding in faith where the Scriptures are concerned; conversely, reading the
Scriptures in faith leads to growth in ecclesial life itself. Here we can see once again the truth of
the celebrated dictum of Saint Gregory the Great: “The divine words grow together with the one
who reads them”.[94] Listening to the word of God introduces and increases ecclesial communion
with all those who walk by faith.“The soul of sacred theology”31. “The study of the sacred page
should be, as it were, the very soul of theology”:[95] this quotation from the Dogmatic Constitution
Dei Verbum has become increasingly familiar over the years. Theological and exegetical
scholarship, in the period after the Second Vatican Council, made frequent reference to this
expression as symbolic of the renewed interest in sacred Scripture. The Twelfth Assembly of the
Synod of Bishops also frequently alluded to this well-known phrase in order to express the
relationship between historical research and a hermeneutic of faith where the sacred text is
concerned. The Fathers acknowledged with joy that study of the word of God in the Church has
grown in recent decades, and they expressed heartfelt gratitude to the many exegetes and
theologians who with dedication, commitment and competence continue to make an essential
contribution to the deeper understanding of the meaning of the Scriptures, as they address the
complex issues facing biblical studies in our day.[96] Sincere gratitude was also expressed to the
members of the Pontifical Biblical Commission, past and present, who in close collaboration with
the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith continue to offer their expertise in the examination of
particular questions raised by the study of sacred Scripture. The Synod likewise felt a need to look
into the present state of biblical studies and their standing within the field of theology. The pastoral
effectiveness of the Church’s activity and the spiritual life of the faithful depend to a great extent on
the fruitfulness of the relationship between exegesis and theology. For this reason, I consider it
important to take up some reflections that emerged in the discussion of this topic during the Synod
sessions.The development of biblical studies and the Church’s magisterium32. Before all else, we
need to acknowledge the benefits that historical-critical exegesis and other recently-developed
methods of textual analysis have brought to the life of the Church.[97] For the Catholic
understanding of sacred Scripture, attention to such methods is indispensable, linked as it is to the
realism of the Incarnation: “This necessity is a consequence of the Christian principle formulated in
the Gospel of John 1:14: Verbum caro factum est. The historical fact is a constitutive dimension of
the Christian faith. The history of salvation is not mythology, but a true history, and it should thus
be studied with the methods of serious historical research”.[98] The study of the Bible requires a
knowledge of these methods of enquiry and their suitable application. While it is true that
scholarship has come to a much greater appreciation of their importance in the modern period,
albeit not everywhere to the same degree, nonetheless the sound ecclesial tradition has always
demonstrated a love for the study of the “letter”. Here we need but recall the monastic culture
which is the ultimate foundation of European culture; at its root lies a concern for the word. The
desire for God includes love for the word in all its dimensions: “because in the word of the Bible
God comes to us and we to him, we must learn to penetrate the secret of language, to understand
it in its structure and its mode of expression. Thus, because of the search for God, the secular
20
sciences which lead to a greater understanding of language became important”.[99]33. The
Church’s living magisterium, which is charged with “giving an authentic interpretation of the word
of God, whether in its written form or in the form of tradition”,[100] intervened in a prudent and
balanced way regarding the correct response to the introduction of new methods of historical
analysis. I think in particular of the Encyclicals Providentissimus Deus of Pope Leo XIII and Divino
Afflante Spiritu of Pope Pius XII. My venerable predecessor John Paul II recalled the importance
of these documents on the centenary and the fiftieth anniversary respectively of their
promulgation.[101] Pope Leo XIII’s intervention had the merit of protecting the Catholic
interpretation of the Bible from the inroads of rationalism, without, however, seeking refuge in a
spiritual meaning detached from history. Far from shunning scientific criticism, the Church was
wary only of “preconceived opinions that claim to be based on science, but which in reality
surreptitiously cause science to depart from its domain”.[102] Pope Pius XII, on the other hand,
was faced with attacks on the part of those who proposed a so-called mystical exegesis which
rejected any form of scientific approach. The Encyclical Divino Afflante Spiritu was careful to avoid
any hint of a dichotomy between “scientific exegesis” for use in apologetics and “spiritual
interpretation meant for internal use”; rather it affirmed both the “theological significance of the
literal sense, methodically defined” and the fact that “determining the spiritual sense … belongs
itself to the realm of exegetical science”.[103] In this way, both documents rejected “a split
between the human and the divine, between scientific research and respect for the faith, between
the literal sense and the spiritual sense”.[104] This balance was subsequently maintained by the
1993 document of the Pontifical Biblical Commission: “in their work of interpretation, Catholic
exegetes must never forget that what they are interpreting is the word of God. Their common task
is not finished when they have simply determined sources, defined forms or explained literary
procedures. They arrive at the true goal of their work only when they have explained the meaning
of the biblical text as God’s word for today”.[105]The Council’s biblical hermeneutic: a directive to
be appropriated34. Against this background, one can better appreciate the great principles of
interpretation proper to Catholic exegesis set forth by the Second Vatican Council, especially in
the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum: “Seeing that, in sacred Scripture, God speaks through
human beings in human fashion, it follows that the interpreters of sacred Scripture, if they are to
ascertain what God has wished to communicate to us, should carefully search out the meaning
which the sacred writers really had in mind, that meaning which God had thought well to manifest
through the medium of their words”.[106] On the one hand, the Council emphasizes the study of
literary genres and historical context as basic elements for understanding the meaning intended by
the sacred author. On the other hand, since Scripture must be interpreted in the same Spirit in
which it was written, the Dogmatic Constitution indicates three fundamental criteria for an
appreciation of the divine dimension of the Bible: 1) the text must be interpreted with attention to
the unity of the whole of Scripture; nowadays this is called canonical exegesis; 2) account is be
taken of the living Tradition of the whole Church; and, finally, 3) respect must be shown for the
analogy of faith. “Only where both methodological levels, the historical-critical and the theological,
are respected, can one speak of a theological exegesis, an exegesis worthy of this book”.[107]The
Synod Fathers rightly stated that the positive fruit yielded by the use of modern historical-critical
21
research is undeniable. While today’s academic exegesis, including that of Catholic scholars, is
highly competent in the field of historical-critical methodology and its latest developments, it must
be said that comparable attention need to be paid to the theological dimension of the biblical texts,
so that they can be more deeply understood in accordance with the three elements indicated by
the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum.[108]The danger of dualism and a secularized
hermeneutic35. In this regard we should mention the serious risk nowadays of a dualistic
approach to sacred Scripture. To distinguish two levels of approach to the Bible does not in any
way mean to separate or oppose them, nor simply to juxtapose them. They exist only in
reciprocity. Unfortunately, a sterile separation sometimes creates a barrier between exegesis and
theology, and this “occurs even at the highest academic levels”.[109] Here I would mention the
most troubling consequences, which are to be avoided.a) First and foremost, if the work of
exegesis is restricted to the first level alone, Scripture ends up being a text belonging only to the
past: “One can draw moral consequences from it, one can learn history, but the Book as such
speaks only of the past, and exegesis is no longer truly theological, but becomes pure
historiography, history of literature”.[110] Clearly, such a reductive approach can never make it
possible to comprehend the event of God’s revelation through his word, which is handed down to
us in the living Tradition and in Scripture.b) The lack of a hermeneutic of faith with regard to
Scripture entails more than a simple absence; in its place there inevitably enters another
hermeneutic, a positivistic and secularized hermeneutic ultimately based on the conviction that the
Divine does not intervene in human history. According to this hermeneutic, whenever a divine
element seems present, it has to be explained in some other way, reducing everything to the
human element. This leads to interpretations that deny the historicity of the divine elements.[111]c)
Such a position can only prove harmful to the life of the Church, casting doubt over fundamental
mysteries of Christianity and their historicity – as, for example, the institution of the Eucharist and
the resurrection of Christ. A philosophical hermeneutic is thus imposed, one which denies the
possibility that the Divine can enter and be present within history. The adoption of this hermeneutic
within theological studies inevitably introduces a sharp dichotomy between an exegesis limited
solely to the first level and a theology tending towards a spiritualization of the meaning of the
Scriptures, one which would fail to respect the historical character of revelation.All this is also
bound to have a negative impact on the spiritual life and on pastoral activity; “as a consequence of
the absence of the second methodological level, a profound gulf is opened up between scientific
exegesis and lectio divina. This can give rise to a lack of clarity in the preparation of
homilies”.[112] It must also be said that this dichotomy can create confusion and a lack of stability
in the intellectual formation of candidates for ecclesial ministries.[113] In a word, “where exegesis
is not theology, Scripture cannot be the soul of theology, and conversely, where theology is not
essentially the interpretation of the Church’s Scripture, such a theology no longer has a
foundation”.[114] Hence we need to take a more careful look at the indications provided by the
Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum in this regard.Faith and reason in the approach to Scripture36.
I believe that what Pope John Paul II wrote about this question in his Encyclical Fides et Ratio can
lead to a fuller understanding of exegesis and its relationship to the whole of theology. He stated
that we should not underestimate “the danger inherent in seeking to derive the truth of sacred
22
Scripture from the use of one method alone, ignoring the need for a more comprehensive
exegesis which enables the exegete, together with the whole Church, to arrive at the full sense of
the texts. Those who devote themselves to the study of sacred Scripture should always remember
that the various hermeneutical approaches have their own philosophical underpinnings, which
need to be carefully evaluated before they are applied to the sacred texts”.[115]This far-sighted
reflection enables us to see how a hermeneutical approach to sacred Scripture inevitably brings
into play the proper relationship between faith and reason. Indeed, the secularized hermeneutic of
sacred Scripture is the product of reason’s attempt structurally to exclude any possibility that God
might enter into our lives and speak to us in human words. Here too, we need to urge a
broadening of the scope of reason.[116] In applying methods of historical analysis, no criteria
should be adopted which would rule out in advance God’s self-disclosure in human history. The
unity of the two levels at work in the interpretation of sacred Scripture presupposes, in a word, the
harmony of faith and reason. On the one hand, it calls for a faith which, by maintaining a proper
relationship with right reason, never degenerates into fideism, which in the case of Scripture would
end up in fundamentalism. On the other hand, it calls for a reason which, in its investigation of the
historical elements present in the Bible, is marked by openness and does not reject a priori
anything beyond its own terms of reference. In any case, the religion of the incarnate Logos can
hardly fail to appear profoundly reasonable to anyone who sincerely seeks the truth and the
ultimate meaning of his or her own life and history.Literal sense and spiritual sense37. A
significant contribution to the recovery of an adequate scriptural hermeneutic, as the synodal
assembly stated, can also come from renewed attention to the Fathers of the Church and their
exegetical approach.[117] The Church Fathers present a theology that still has great value today
because at its heart is the study of sacred Scripture as a whole. Indeed, the Fathers are primarily
and essentially “commentators on sacred Scripture”.[118] Their example can “teach modern
exegetes a truly religious approach to sacred Scripture, and likewise an interpretation that is
constantly attuned to the criterion of communion with the experience of the Church, which
journeys through history under the guidance of the Holy Spirit”.[119]While obviously lacking the
philological and historical resources at the disposal of modern exegesis, the patristic and
mediaeval tradition could recognize the different senses of Scripture, beginning with the literal
sense, namely, “the meaning conveyed by the words of Scripture and discovered by exegesis,
following the rules of sound interpretation”.[120] Saint Thomas of Aquinas, for example, states that
“all the senses of sacred Scripture are based on the literal sense”.[121] It is necessary, however,
to remember that in patristic and medieval times every form of exegesis, including the literal form,
was carried out on the basis of faith, without there necessarily being any distinction between the
literal sense and the spiritual sense. One may mention in this regard the medieval couplet which
expresses the relationship between the different senses of Scripture:“Littera gesta docet, quid
credas allegoria,
Moralis quid agas, quo tendas anagogia.The letter speaks of deeds; allegory about the faith;
The moral about our actions; anagogy about our destiny”.[122]Here we can note the unity and
interrelation between the literal sense and the spiritual sense, which for its part is subdivided into
three senses which deal with the contents of the faith, with the moral life and with our
23
eschatological aspiration.In a word, while acknowledging the validity and necessity, as well as the
limits, of the historical-critical method, we learn from the Fathers that exegesis “is truly faithful to
the proper intention of biblical texts when it goes not only to the heart of their formulation to find
the reality of faith there expressed, but also seeks to link this reality to the experience of faith in
our present world”.[123] Only against this horizon can we recognize that the word of God is living
and addressed to each of us in the here and now of our lives. In this sense, the Pontifical Biblical
Commission’s definition of the spiritual sense, as understood by Christian faith, remains fully valid:
it is “the meaning expressed by the biblical texts when read, under the influence of the Holy Spirit,
in the context of the paschal mystery of Christ and of the new life which flows from it. This context
truly exists. In it the New Testament recognizes the fulfilment of the Scriptures. It is therefore quite
acceptable to re-read the Scriptures in the light of this new context, which is that of life in the
Spirit”.[124]The need to transcend the “letter”38. In rediscovering the interplay between the
different senses of Scripture it thus becomes essential to grasp the passage from letter to spirit.
This is not an automatic, spontaneous passage; rather, the letter needs to be transcended: “the
word of God can never simply be equated with the letter of the text. To attain to it involves a
progression and a process of understanding guided by the inner movement of the whole corpus,
and hence it also has to become a vital process”.[125] Here we see the reason why an authentic
process of interpretation is never purely an intellectual process but also a lived one, demanding
full engagement in the life of the Church, which is life “according to the Spirit” (Gal 5:16). The
criteria set forth in Number 12 of the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum thus become clearer: this
progression cannot take place with regard to an individual literary fragment unless it is seen in
relation to the whole of Scripture. Indeed, the goal to which we are necessarily progressing is the
one Word. There is an inner drama in this process, since the passage that takes place in the
power of the Spirit inevitably engages each person’s freedom. Saint Paul lived this passage to the
full in his own life. In his words: “the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life”
(2 Cor 3:6), he expressed in radical terms the significance of this process of transcending the letter
and coming to understand it only in terms of the whole. Paul discovered that “the Spirit of freedom
has a name, and hence that freedom has an inner criterion: ‘The Lord is the Spirit and where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom’ (2 Cor 3:17). The Spirit of freedom is not simply the
exegete’s own idea, the exegete’s own vision. The Spirit is Christ, and Christ is the Lord who
shows us the way”.[126] We know that for Saint Augustine too this passage was at once dramatic
and liberating; he came to believe the Scriptures – which at first sight struck him as so disjointed in
themselves and in places so coarse – through the very process of transcending the letter which he
learned from Saint Ambrose in typological interpretation, wherein the entire Old Testament is a
path to Jesus Christ. For Saint Augustine, transcending the literal sense made the letter itself
credible, and enabled him to find at last the answer to his deep inner restlessness and his thirst for
truth.[127]The Bible’s intrinsic unity39. In the passage from letter to spirit, we also learn, within the
Church’s great tradition, to see the unity of all Scripture, grounded in the unity of God’s word,
which challenges our life and constantly calls us to conversion.[128] Here the words of Hugh of
Saint Victor remain a sure guide: “All divine Scripture is one book, and this one book is Christ,
speaks of Christ and finds its fulfilment in Christ”.[129] Viewed in purely historical or literary terms,
24
of course, the Bible is not a single book, but a collection of literary texts composed over the course
of a thousand years or more, and its individual books are not easily seen to possess an interior
unity; instead, we see clear inconsistencies between them. This was already the case with the
Bible of Israel, which we Christians call the Old Testament. It is all the more so when, as
Christians, we relate the New Testament and its writings as a kind of hermeneutical key to Israel’s
Bible, thus interpreting the latter as a path to Christ. The New Testament generally does not
employ the term “Scripture” (cf. Rom 4:3; 1 Pet 2:6), but rather “the Scriptures” (cf. Mt 21:43; Jn
5:39; Rom 1:2; 2 Pet 3:16), which nonetheless are seen in their entirety as the one word of God
addressed to us.[130] This makes it clear that the person of Christ gives unity to all the
“Scriptures” in relation to the one “Word”. In this way we can understand the words of Number 12
of the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum, which point to the internal unity of the entire Bible as a
decisive criterion for a correct hermeneutic of faith.The relationship between the Old and the New
Testaments40. Against this backdrop of the unity of the Scriptures in Christ, theologians and
pastors alike need to be conscious of the relationship between Old and the New Testaments. First
of all, it is evident that the New Testament itself acknowledges the Old Testament as the word of
God and thus accepts the authority of the sacred Scriptures of the Jewish people.[131] It implicitly
acknowledges them by using the same language and by frequently referring to passages from
these Scriptures. It explicitly acknowledges them by citing many parts of them as a basis for
argument. In the New Testament, an argument based on texts from the Old Testament thus has a
definitive quality, superior to that of mere human argumentation. In the Fourth Gospel, Jesus
states that “Scripture cannot be rejected” (Jn 10:35) and Saint Paul specifically makes clear that
the Old Testament revelation remains valid for us Christians (cf. Rom 15:4; 1 Cor 10:11).[132] We
also affirm that “Jesus of Nazareth was a Jew and the Holy Land is the motherland of the
Church”:[133] the roots of Christianity are found in the Old Testament, and Christianity continually
draws nourishment from these roots. Consequently, sound Christian doctrine has always resisted
all new forms of Marcionism, which tend, in different ways, to set the Old Testament in opposition
to the New.[134]Moreover, the New Testament itself claims to be consistent with the Old and
proclaims that in the mystery of the life, death and resurrection of Christ the sacred Scriptures of
the Jewish people have found their perfect fulfilment. It must be observed, however, that the
concept of the fulfilment of the Scriptures is a complex one, since it has three dimensions: a basic
aspect of continuity with the Old Testament revelation, an aspect of discontinuity and an aspect of
fulfilment and transcendence. The mystery of Christ stands in continuity of intent with the sacrificial
cult of the Old Testament, but it came to pass in a very different way, corresponding to a number
of prophetic statements and thus reaching a perfection never previously obtained. The Old
Testament is itself replete with tensions between its institutional and its prophetic aspects. The
paschal mystery of Christ is in complete conformity – albeit in a way that could not have been
anticipated – with the prophecies and the foreshadowings of the Scriptures; yet it presents clear
aspects of discontinuity with regard to the institutions of the Old Testament.41. These
considerations show the unique importance of the Old Testament for Christians, while at the same
time bringing out the newness of Christological interpretation. From apostolic times and in her
living Tradition, the Church has stressed the unity of God’s plan in the two Testaments through the
25
use of typology; this procedure is in no way arbitrary, but is intrinsic to the events related in the
sacred text and thus involves the whole of Scripture. Typology “discerns in God’s works of the Old
Covenant prefigurations of what he accomplished in the fullness of time in the person of his
incarnate Son”.[135] Christians, then, read the Old Testament in the light of Christ crucified and
risen. While typological interpretation manifests the inexhaustible content of the Old Testament
from the standpoint of the New, we must not forget that the Old Testament retains its own inherent
value as revelation, as our Lord himself reaffirmed (cf. Mk 12:29-31). Consequently, “the New
Testament has to be read in the light of the Old. Early Christian catechesis made constant use of
the Old Testament (cf. 1 Cor 5:6-8; 1 Cor 10:1-11)”.[136] For this reason the Synod Fathers stated
that “the Jewish understanding of the Bible can prove helpful to Christians for their own
understanding and study of the Scriptures”.[137]“The New Testament is hidden in the Old and the
Old is made manifest in the New”,[138] as Saint Augustine perceptively noted. It is important,
therefore, that in both pastoral and academic settings the close relationship between the two
Testaments be clearly brought out, in keeping with the dictum of Saint Gregory the Great that
“what the Old Testament promised, the New Testament made visible; what the former announces
in a hidden way, the latter openly proclaims as present. Therefore the Old Testament is a
prophecy of the New Testament; and the best commentary on the Old Testament is the New
Testament”.[139]The “dark” passages of the Bible42. In discussing the relationship between the
Old and the New Testaments, the Synod also considered those passages in the Bible which, due
to the violence and immorality they occasionally contain, prove obscure and difficult. Here it must
be remembered first and foremost that biblical revelation is deeply rooted in history. God’s plan is
manifested progressively and it is accomplished slowly, in successive stages and despite human
resistance. God chose a people and patiently worked to guide and educate them. Revelation is
suited to the cultural and moral level of distant times and thus describes facts and customs, such
as cheating and trickery, and acts of violence and massacre, without explicitly denouncing the
immorality of such things. This can be explained by the historical context, yet it can cause the
modern reader to be taken aback, especially if he or she fails to take account of the many “dark”
deeds carried out down the centuries, and also in our own day. In the Old Testament, the
preaching of the prophets vigorously challenged every kind of injustice and violence, whether
collective or individual, and thus became God’s way of training his people in preparation for the
Gospel. So it would be a mistake to neglect those passages of Scripture that strike us as
problematic. Rather, we should be aware that the correct interpretation of these passages requires
a degree of expertise, acquired through a training that interprets the texts in their historical-literary
context and within the Christian perspective which has as its ultimate hermeneutical key “the
Gospel and the new commandment of Jesus Christ brought about in the paschal mystery”.[140] I
encourage scholars and pastors to help all the faithful to approach these passages through an
interpretation which enables their meaning to emerge in the light of the mystery of
Christ.Christians, Jews and the sacred Scriptures43. Having considered the close relationship
between the New Testament and the Old, we now naturally turn to the special bond which that
relationship has engendered between Christians and Jews, a bond that must never be overlooked.
Pope John Paul II, speaking to Jews, called them “our ‘beloved brothers’ in the faith of Abraham,
26
our Patriarch”.[141] To acknowledge this fact is in no way to disregard the instances of
discontinuity which the New Testament asserts with regard to the institutions of the Old
Testament, much less the fulfilment of the Scriptures in the mystery of Jesus Christ,
acknowledged as Messiah and Son of God. All the same, this profound and radical difference by
no means implies mutual hostility. The example of Saint Paul (cf. Rom 9-11) shows on the
contrary that “an attitude of respect, esteem and love for the Jewish people is the only truly
Christian attitude in the present situation, which is a mysterious part of God’s wholly positive
plan”.[142] Indeed, Saint Paul says of the Jews that: “as regards election they are beloved for the
sake of their forefathers, for the gifts and the call of God are irrevocable!” (Rom 11:28-29).Saint
Paul also uses the lovely image of the olive tree to describe the very close relationship between
Christians and Jews: the Church of the Gentiles is like a wild olive shoot, grafted onto the good
olive tree that is the people of the Covenant (cf. Rom 11:17-24). In other words, we draw our
nourishment from the same spiritual roots. We encounter one another as brothers and sisters who
at certain moments in their history have had a tense relationship, but are now firmly committed to
building bridges of lasting friendship.[143] As Pope John Paul II said on another occasion: “We
have much in common. Together we can do much for peace, justice and for a more fraternal and
more humane world”.[144]I wish to state once more how much the Church values her dialogue
with the Jews. Wherever it seems appropriate, it would be good to create opportunities for
encounter and exchange in public as well as in private, and thus to promote growth in reciprocal
knowledge, in mutual esteem and cooperation, also in the study of the sacred Scriptures.The
fundamentalist interpretation of sacred Scripture44. The attention we have been paying to different
aspects of the theme of biblical hermeneutics now enables us to consider a subject which came
up a number of times during the Synod: that of the fundamentalist interpretation of sacred
Scripture.[145] The Pontifical Biblical Commission, in its document The Interpretation of the Bible
in the Church, has laid down some important guidelines. Here I would like especially to deal with
approaches which fail to respect the authenticity of the sacred text, but promote subjective and
arbitrary interpretations. The “literalism” championed by the fundamentalist approach actually
represents a betrayal of both the literal and the spiritual sense, and opens the way to various
forms of manipulation, as, for example, by disseminating anti-ecclesial interpretations of the
Scriptures. “The basic problem with fundamentalist interpretation is that, refusing to take into
account the historical character of biblical revelation, it makes itself incapable of accepting the full
truth of the incarnation itself. As regards relationships with God, fundamentalism seeks to escape
any closeness of the divine and the human … for this reason, it tends to treat the biblical text as if
it had been dictated word for word by the Spirit. It fails to recognize that the word of God has been
formulated in language and expression conditioned by various periods”.[146] Christianity, on the
other hand, perceives in the words the Word himself, the Logos who displays his mystery through
this complexity and the reality of human history.[147] The true response to a fundamentalist
approach is “the faith-filled interpretation of sacred Scripture”. This manner of interpretation,
“practised from antiquity within the Church’s Tradition, seeks saving truth for the life of the
individual Christian and for the Church. It recognizes the historical value of the biblical tradition.
Precisely because of the tradition’s value as an historical witness, this reading seeks to discover
27
the living meaning of the sacred Scriptures for the lives of believers today”,[148] while not ignoring
the human mediation of the inspired text and its literary genres.Dialogue between pastors,
theologians and exegetes45. An authentic hermeneutic of faith has several important
consequences for the Church’s pastoral activity. The Synod Fathers themselves recommended,
for example, a closer working relationship between pastors, exegetes and theologians. Episcopal
Conferences might foster such encounters with the “aim of promoting greater communion in the
service of the word of God”.[149] Cooperation of this sort will help all to carry out their work more
effectively for the benefit of the whole Church. For scholars too, this pastoral orientation involves
approaching the sacred text with the realization that it is a message which the Lord addresses to
us for our salvation. In the words of the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum, “Catholic exegetes
and other workers in the field of sacred theology should work diligently with one another and under
the watchful eye of the sacred magisterium. Using appropriate techniques, they should together
set about examining and explaining the sacred texts in such a way that as many as possible of
those who are ministers of God’s word may be able to dispense fruitfully the nourishment of the
Scriptures to the people of God. This nourishment enlightens the mind, strengthens the will and
fires the hearts of men and women with the love of God”.[150]The Bible and ecumenism46.
Conscious that the Church has her foundation in Christ, the incarnate Word of God, the Synod
wished to emphasize the centrality of biblical studies within ecumenical dialogue aimed at the full
expression of the unity of all believers in Christ.[151] The Scriptures themselves contain Jesus’
moving prayer to the Father that his disciples might be one, so that the world may believe (cf.
Jn 17:21). All this can only strengthen our conviction that by listening and meditating together on
the Scriptures, we experience a real, albeit not yet full communion;[152] “shared listening to the
Scriptures thus spurs us on towards the dialogue of charity and enables growth in the dialogue of
truth”.[153] Listening together to the word of God, engaging in biblical lectio divina, letting
ourselves be struck by the inexhaustible freshness of God’s word which never grows old,
overcoming our deafness to those words that do not fit our own opinions or prejudices, listening
and studying within the communion of the believers of every age: all these things represent a way
of coming to unity in faith as a response to hearing the word of God.[154] The words of the
Second Vatican Council were clear in this regard: “in [ecumenical] dialogue itself, sacred Scripture
is a precious instrument in the mighty hand of God for attaining to that unity which the Saviour
holds out to all”.[155] Consequently, there should be an increase in ecumenical study, discussion
and celebrations of the word of God, with due respect for existing norms and the variety of
traditions.[156] These celebrations advance the cause of ecumenism and, when suitably carried
out, they represent intense moments of authentic prayer asking God to hasten the day when we
will all be able at last to sit at the one table and drink from the one cup. Nonetheless, while it is
praiseworthy and right to promote such services, care must be taken that they are not proposed to
the faithful as alternatives to the celebration of Holy Mass on Sundays or holydays of obligation.In
this work of study and prayer, we serenely acknowledge those aspects which still need to be
explored more deeply and those on which we still differ, such as the understanding of the
authoritative subject of interpretation in the Church and the decisive role of the
magisterium.[157]Finally, I wish to emphasize the statements of the Synod Fathers about the
28
ecumenical importance of translations of the Bible in the various languages. We know that
translating a text is no mere mechanical task, but belongs in some sense to the work of
interpretation. In this regard, the Venerable John Paul II observed that “anyone who recalls how
heavily debates about Scripture influenced divisions, especially in the West, can appreciate the
significant step forward which these common translations represent”.[158] Promoting common
translations of the Bible is part of the ecumenical enterprise. I would like to thank all those
engaged in this important work, and I encourage them to persevere in their efforts.Consequences
for the study of theology47. A further consequence of an adequate hermeneutic of faith has to do
with its necessary implications for exegetical and theological formation, particularly that of
candidates for the priesthood. Care must be taken to ensure that the study of sacred Scripture is
truly the soul of theology inasmuch as it is acknowledged as the word of God addressed to today’s
world, to the Church and to each of us personally. It is important that the criteria indicated in
Number 12 of the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum receive real attention and become the object
of deeper study. A notion of scholarly research that would consider itself neutral with regard to
Scripture should not be encouraged. As well as learning the original languages in which the Bible
was written and suitable methods of interpretation, students need to have a deep spiritual life, in
order to appreciate that the Scripture can only be understood if it is lived.Along these lines, I urge
that the study of the word of God, both handed down and written, be constantly carried out in a
profoundly ecclesial spirit, and that academic formation take due account of the pertinent
interventions of the magisterium, which “is not superior to the word of God, but is rather its
servant. It teaches only what has been handed on to it. At the divine command and with the help
of the Holy Spirit, it listens to this devoutly, guards it reverently and expounds it faithfully”.[159]
Care must thus be taken that the instruction imparted acknowledge that “sacred Tradition, sacred
Scripture and the magisterium of the Church are so connected and associated that one of them
cannot stand without the others”.[160] It is my hope that, in fidelity to the teaching of the Second
Vatican Council, the study of sacred Scripture, read within the communion of the universal Church,
will truly be the soul of theological studies.[161]The saints and the interpretation of Scripture48.
The interpretation of sacred Scripture would remain incomplete were it not to include listening to
those who have truly lived the word of God: namely, the saints.[162] Indeed, “viva lectio est vita
bonorum”.[163] The most profound interpretation of Scripture comes precisely from those who let
themselves be shaped by the word of God through listening, reading and assiduous meditation.It
is certainly not by chance that the great currents of spirituality in the Church’s history originated
with an explicit reference to Scripture. I am thinking for example of Saint Anthony the Abbot, who
was moved by hearing Christ’s words: “if you would be perfect, go, sell what you possess and give
to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me” (Mt 19:21).[164] No less
striking is the question posed by Saint Basil the Great in the Moralia: “What is the distinctive mark
of faith? Full and unhesitating certainty that the words inspired by God are true … What is the
distinctive mark of the faithful? Conforming their lives with the same complete certainty to the
meaning of the words of Scripture, not daring to remove or add a single thing”.[165] Saint
Benedict, in his Rule, refers to Scripture as “a most perfect norm for human life”.[166] Saint
Francis of Assisi – we learn from Thomas of Celano – “upon hearing that the disciples of Christ
29
must possess neither gold, nor silver nor money, nor carry a bag, nor bread, nor a staff for the
journey, nor sandals nor two tunics … exulting in the Holy Spirit, immediately cried out: ‘This is
what I want, this is what I ask for, this I long to do with all my heart!’”.[167] Saint Clare of Assisi
shared fully in the experience of Saint Francis: “The form of life of the Order of Poor Sisters – she
writes – is this: to observe the holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ”.[168] So too, Saint Dominic
“everywhere showed himself to be a man of the Gospel, in word as in deed”,[169] and wanted his
friars likewise to be “men of the Gospel”.[170] The Carmelite Saint Teresa of Avila, who in her
writings constantly uses biblical images to explain her mystical experiences, says that Jesus
himself revealed to her that “all the evil in the world is derived from not knowing clearly the truths
of sacred Scripture”.[171] Saint Thérèse of the Child Jesus discovered that love was her personal
vocation by poring over the Scriptures, especially Chapters 12 and 13 of the First Letter to the
Corinthians;[172] the same saint describes the attraction of the Scriptures: “No sooner do I glance
at the Gospel, but immediately I breathe in the fragrance of the life of Jesus and I know where to
run”.[173] Every saint is like a ray of light streaming forth from the word of God: we can think of
Saint Ignatius of Loyola in his search for truth and in his discernment of spirits; Saint John Bosco
in his passion for the education of the young; Saint John Mary Vianney in his awareness of the
grandeur of the priesthood as gift and task; Saint Pius of Pietrelcina in his serving as an
instrument of divine mercy; Saint Josemaria Escrivá in his preaching of the universal call to
holiness; Blessed Teresa of Calcutta, the missionary of God’s charity towards the poorest of the
poor, and then the martyrs of Nazism and Communism, represented by Saint Teresa Benedicta of
the Cross (Edith Stein), a Carmelite nun, and by Blessed Aloysius Stepinac, the Cardinal
Archbishop of Zagreb.49. Holiness inspired by the word of God thus belongs in a way to the
prophetic tradition, wherein the word of God sets the prophet’s very life at its service. In this sense,
holiness in the Church constitutes an interpretation of Scripture which cannot be overlooked. The
Holy Spirit who inspired the sacred authors is the same Spirit who impels the saints to offer their
lives for the Gospel. In striving to learn from their example, we set out on the sure way towards a
living and effective hermeneutic of the word of God.We saw a direct witness to this link between
holiness and the word of God during the Twelfth Assembly of the Synod when four new saints
were canonized on 12 October in Saint Peter’s Square: Gaetano Errico, priest and founder of the
Congregation of Missionaries of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary; Mother Maria Bernarda
Bütler, a native of Switzerland and a missionary in Ecuador and Colombia; Sister Alphonsa of the
Immaculate Conception, the first canonized saint born in India; and the young Ecuadorian
laywoman Narcisa de Jesús Martillo Morán. With their lives they testified before the world and the
Church to the perennial fruitfulness of Christ’s Gospel. Through the intercession of these saints
canonized at the time of the synodal assembly on the word of God, let us ask the Lord that our
own lives may be that “good soil” in which the divine sower plants the word, so that it may bear
within us fruits of holiness, “thirtyfold, sixtyfold, a hundredfold” (Mk 4:20).PART TWOVERBUM IN
ECCLESIA“But to all who received him he gave power
to become children of God”
(Jn 1:12)The Word Of God And The ChurchThe Church receives the word50. The Lord speaks his
word so that it may be received by those who were created “through” that same word. “He came
30
among his own” (Jn 1:11): his word is not something fundamentally alien to us, and creation was
willed in a relationship of familiarity with God’s own life. Yet the Prologue of the Fourth Gospel also
places us before the rejection of God’s word by “his own”, who “received him not” (Jn 1:11). Not to
receive him means not to listen to his voice, not to be conformed to the Logos. On the other hand,
whenever men and women, albeit frail and sinful, are sincerely open to an encounter with Christ, a
radical transformation begins to take place: “but to all who received him, he gave power to become
children of God” (Jn 1:12). To receive the Word means to let oneself be shaped by him, and thus
to be conformed by the power of the Holy Spirit to Christ, the “only Son from the Father” (Jn 1:14).
It is the beginning of a new creation; a new creature is born, a new people comes to birth. Those
who believe, that is to say, those who live the obedience of faith, are “born of God”
(Jn 1:13) and made sharers in the divine life: sons in the Son (cf. Gal 4:5-6; Rom 8:14-17). As
Saint Augustine puts it nicely in commenting on this passage from John’s Gospel: “you were
created through the word, but now through the word you must be recreated”.[174] Here we can
glimpse the face of the Church as a reality defined by acceptance of the Word of God who, by
taking flesh, came to pitch his tent among us (cf. Jn 1:14). This dwelling-place of God among men,
this shekinah (cf. Ex 26:1), prefigured in the Old Testament, is now fulfilled in God’s definitive
presence among us in Christ.Christ’s constant presence in the life of the Church51. The
relationship between Christ, the Word of the Father, and the Church cannot be fully understood in
terms of a mere past event; rather, it is a living relationship which each member of the faithful is
personally called to enter into. We are speaking of the presence of God’s word to us today: “Lo, I
am with you always, to the close of the age” (Mt 28:20). As Pope John Paul II has said: “Christ’s
relevance for people of all times is shown forth in his body, which is the Church. For this reason
the Lord promised his disciples the Holy Spirit, who would ‘bring to their remembrance’ and teach
them to understand his commandments (cf. Jn 14:26), and who would be the principle and
constant source of a new life in the world (cf. Jn 3:5-8; Rom 8:1-13)”.[175] The Dogmatic
Constitution Dei Verbum expresses this mystery by using the biblical metaphor of a nuptial
dialogue: “God, who spoke in the past, continues to converse with the spouse of his beloved Son.
And the Holy Spirit, through whom the living voice of the Gospel rings out in the Church – and
through it in the world – leads believers to the full truth and makes the word of Christ dwell in them
in all its richness (cf. Col 3:16).”[176]The Bride of Christ – the great teacher of the art of listening –
today too repeats in faith: “Speak, Lord, your Church is listening”.[177] For this reason the
Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum intentionally begins with the words: “Hearing the word of God
reverently and proclaiming it confidently, this sacred Council…”.[178] Here we encounter a
dynamic definition of the Church’s life: “With these words the Council indicates a defining aspect of
the Church: she is a community that hears and proclaims the word of God. The Church draws life
not from herself but from the Gospel, and from the Gospel she discovers ever anew the direction
for her journey. This is an approach that every Christian must understand and apply to himself or
herself: only those who first place themselves in an attitude of listening to the word can go on to
become its heralds”.[179] In the word of God proclaimed and heard, and in the sacraments, Jesus
says today, here and now, to each person: “I am yours, I give myself to you”; so that we can
receive and respond, saying in return: “I am yours”.[180] The Church thus emerges as the milieu
31
in which, by grace, we can experience what John tells us in the Prologue of his Gospel: “to all who
received him he gave power to become children of God” (Jn 1:12).The Liturgy, Privileged Setting
For The Word Of GodThe word of God in the sacred liturgy52. In considering the Church as “the
home of the word”,[181] attention must first be given to the sacred liturgy, for the liturgy is the
privileged setting in which God speaks to us in the midst of our lives; he speaks today to his
people, who hear and respond. Every liturgical action is by its very nature steeped in sacred
Scripture. In the words of the Constitution Sacrosanctum Concilium, “sacred Scripture is of the
greatest importance in the celebration of the liturgy. From it are taken the readings, which are
explained in the homily and the psalms that are sung. From Scripture the petitions, prayers and
liturgical hymns receive their inspiration and substance. From Scripture the liturgical actions and
signs draw their meaning”.[182] Even more, it must be said that Christ himself “is present in his
word, since it is he who speaks when Scripture is read in Church”.[183] Indeed, “the liturgical
celebration becomes the continuing, complete and effective presentation of God’s word. The word
of God, constantly proclaimed in the liturgy, is always a living and effective word through the
power of the Holy Spirit. It expresses the Father’s love that never fails in its effectiveness towards
us”.[184] The Church has always realized that in the liturgical action the word of God is
accompanied by the interior working of the Holy Spirit who makes it effective in the hearts of the
faithful. Thanks to the Paraclete, “the word of God becomes the foundation of the liturgical
celebration, and the rule and support of all our life. The working of the same Holy Spirit … brings
home to each person individually every-thing that in the proclamation of the word of God is spoken
for the good of the whole gathering. In strengthening the unity of all, the Holy Spirit at the same
time fosters a diversity of gifts and furthers their multiform operation”.[185]To understand the word
of God, then, we need to appreciate and experience the essential meaning and value of the
liturgical action. A faith-filled understanding of sacred Scripture must always refer back to the
liturgy, in which the word of God is celebrated as a timely and living word: “In the liturgy the
Church faithfully adheres to the way Christ himself read and explained the sacred Scriptures,
beginning with his coming forth in the synagogue and urging all to search the
Scriptures”.[186]Here one sees the sage pedagogy of the Church, which proclaims and listens to
sacred Scripture following the rhythm of the liturgical year. This expansion of God’s word in time
takes place above all in the Eucharistic celebration and in the Liturgy of the Hours. At the centre of
everything the paschal mystery shines forth, and around it radiate all the mysteries of Christ and
the history of salvation which become sacramentally present: “By recalling in this way the
mysteries of redemption, the Church opens up to the faithful the riches of the saving actions and
the merits of her Lord, and makes them present to all times, allowing the faithful to enter into
contact with them and to be filled with the grace of salvation”.[187] For this reason I encourage the
Church’s Pastors and all engaged in pastoral work to see that all the faithful learn to savour the
deep meaning of the word of God which unfolds each year in the liturgy, revealing the fundamental
mysteries of our faith. This is in turn the basis for a correct approach to sacred Scripture.Sacred
Scripture and the sacraments53. In discussing the importance of the liturgy for understanding the
word of God, the Synod of Bishops highlighted the relationship between sacred Scripture and the
working of the sacraments. There is great need for a deeper investigation of the relationship
32
between word and sacrament in the Church’s pastoral activity and in theological reflection.[188]
Certainly “the liturgy of the word is a decisive element in the celebration of each one of the
sacraments of the Church”;[189] in pastoral practice, however, the faithful are not always
conscious of this connection, nor do they appreciate the unity between gesture and word. It is “the
task of priests and deacons, above all when they administer the sacraments, to explain the unity
between word and sacrament in the ministry of the Church”.[190] The relationship between word
and sacramental gesture is the liturgical expression of God’s activity in the history of salvation
through the performative character of the word itself. In salvation history there is no separation
between what God says and what he does. His word appears as alive and active (cf. Heb 4:12),
as the Hebrew term dabar itself makes clear. In the liturgical action too, we encounter his word
which accomplishes what it says. By educating the People of God to discover the performative
character of God’s word in the liturgy, we will help them to recognize his activity in salvation history
and in their individual lives.The word of God and the Eucharist54. What has been said in general
about the relationship between the word and the sacraments takes on deeper meaning when we
turn to the celebration of the Eucharist. The profound unity of word and Eucharist is grounded in
the witness of Scripture (cf. Jn 6; Lk 24), attested to by the Fathers of the Church, and reaffirmed
by the Second Vatican Council.[191] Here we think of Jesus’ discourse on the bread of life in the
synagogue of Capernaum (cf. Jn 6:22-69), with its underlying comparison between Moses and
Jesus, between the one who spoke face to face with God (cf. Ex 33:11) and the one who makes
God known (cf. Jn 1:18). Jesus’ discourse on the bread speaks of the gift of God, which Moses
obtained for his people with the manna in the desert, which is really the Torah, the life-giving word
of God (cf. Ps 119; Pr 9:5). In his own person Jesus brings to fulfilment the ancient image: “The
bread of God is that which comes down from heaven and gives life to the world” … “I am the bread
of life” (Jn 6:33-35). Here “the law has become a person. When we encounter Jesus, we feed on
the living God himself, so to speak; we truly eat ‘the bread from heaven’”.[192] In the discourse at
Capernaum, John’s Prologue is brought to a deeper level. There God’s Logos became flesh, but
here this flesh becomes “bread” given for the life of the world (cf. Jn 6:51), with an allusion to
Jesus’ self-gift in the mystery of the cross, confirmed by the words about his blood being given as
drink (cf. Jn 6:53). The mystery of the Eucharist reveals the true manna, the true bread of heaven:
it is God’s Logos made flesh, who gave himself up for us in the paschal mystery.Luke’s account of
the disciples on the way to Emmaus enables us to reflect further on this link between the hearing
of the word and the breaking of the bread (cf. Lk 24:13-35). Jesus approached the disciples on the
day after the Sabbath, listened as they spoke of their dashed hopes, and, joining them on their
journey, “interpreted to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself” (24:27). The two
disciples began to look at the Scriptures in a new way in the company of this traveller who seemed
so surprisingly familiar with their lives. What had taken place in those days no longer appeared to
them as failure, but as fulfilment and a new beginning. And yet, apparently not even these words
were enough for the two disciples. The Gospel of Luke relates that “their eyes were opened and
they recognized him” (24:31) only when Jesus took the bread, said the blessing, broke it and gave
it to them, whereas earlier “their eyes were kept from recognizing him” (24:16). The presence of
Jesus, first with his words and then with the act of breaking bread, made it possible for the
33
disciples to recognize him. Now they were able to appreciate in a new way all that they had
previously experienced with him: “Did not our hearts burn within us while he talked to us on the
road, while he opened to us the Scriptures?” (24:32).55. From these accounts it is clear that
Scripture itself points us towards an appreciation of its own unbreakable bond with the Eucharist.
“It can never be forgotten that the divine word, read and proclaimed by the Church, has as its one
purpose the sacrifice of the new new covenant and the banquet of grace, that is, the
Eucharist”.[193] Word and Eucharist are so deeply bound together that we cannot understand one
without the other: the word of God sacramentally takes flesh in the event of the Eucharist. The
Eucharist opens us to an understanding of Scripture, just as Scripture for its part illumines and
explains the mystery of the Eucharist. Unless we acknowledge the Lord’s real presence in the
Eucharist, our understanding of Scripture remains imperfect. For this reason “the Church has
honoured the word of God and the Eucharistic mystery with the same reverence, although not with
the same worship, and has always and everywhere insisted upon and sanctioned such honour.
Moved by the example of her Founder, she has never ceased to celebrate his paschal mystery by
coming together to read ‘in all the Scriptures the things concerning him’ (Lk 24:27) and to carry out
the work of salvation through the celebration of the memorial of the Lord and through the
sacraments”.[194]The sacramentality of the word56. Reflection on the performative character of
the word of God in the sacramental action and a growing appreciation of the relationship between
word and Eucharist lead to yet another significant theme which emerged during the synodal
assembly, that of the sacramentality of the word.[195] Here it may help to recall that Pope John
Paul II had made reference to the “sacramental character of revelation” and in particular to “the
sign of the Eucharist in which the indissoluble unity between the signifier and signified makes it
possible to grasp the depths of the mystery”.[196] We come to see that at the heart of the
sacramentality of the word of God is the mystery of the Incarnation itself: “the Word became flesh”
(Jn 1:14), the reality of the revealed mystery is offered to us in the “flesh” of the Son. The Word of
God can be perceived by faith through the “sign” of human words and actions. Faith acknowledges
God’s Word by accepting the words and actions by which he makes himself known to us. The
sacramental character of revelation points in turn to the history of salvation, to the way that word of
God enters time and space, and speaks to men and women, who are called to accept his gift in
faith.The sacramentality of the word can thus be understood by analogy with the real presence of
Christ under the appearances of the consecrated bread and wine.[197] By approaching the altar
and partaking in the Eucharistic banquet we truly share in the body and blood of Christ. The
proclamation of God’s word at the celebration entails an acknowledgment that Christ himself is
present, that he speaks to us,[198] and that he wishes to be heard. Saint Jerome speaks of the
way we ought to approach both the Eucharist and the word of God: “We are reading the sacred
Scriptures. For me, the Gospel is the Body of Christ; for me, the holy Scriptures are his teaching.
And when he says: whoever does not eat my flesh and drink my blood (Jn 6:53), even though
these words can also be understood of the [Eucharistic] Mystery, Christ’s body and blood are
really the word of Scripture, God’s teaching. When we approach the [Eucharistic] Mystery, if a
crumb falls to the ground we are troubled. Yet when we are listening to the word of God, and
God’s Word and Christ’s flesh and blood are being poured into our ears yet we pay no heed, what
34
great peril should we not feel?”.[199] Christ, truly present under the species of bread and wine, is
analogously present in the word proclaimed in the liturgy. A deeper understanding of the
sacramentality of God’s word can thus lead us to a more unified understanding of the mystery of
revelation, which takes place through “deeds and words intimately connected”;[200] an
appreciation of this can only benefit the spiritual life of the faithful and the Church’s pastoral
activity.Sacred Scripture and the Lectionary57. In stressing the bond between word and Eucharist,
the Synod also rightly wanted to call attention to certain aspects of the celebration which concern
the service of the word. In the first place I wish to mention the importance of the Lectionary. The
reform called for by the Second Vatican Council[201] has borne fruit in a richer access to sacred
Scripture, which is now offered in abundance, especially at Sunday Mass. The present structure of
the Lectionary not only presents the more important texts of Scripture with some frequency, but
also helps us to understand the unity of God’s plan thanks to the interplay of the Old and New
Testament readings, an interplay “in which Christ is the central figure, commemorated in his
paschal mystery”.[202] Any remaining difficulties in seeing the relationship between those
readings should be approached in the light of canonical interpretation, that is to say, by referring to
the inherent unity of the Bible as a whole. Wherever necessary, the competent offices and groups
can make provision for publications aimed at bringing out the interconnection of the Lectionary
readings, all of which are to be proclaimed to the liturgical assembly as called for by the liturgy of
the day. Other problems or difficulties should be brought to the attention of the Congregation for
Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments.Nor should we overlook the fact that the
current Lectionary of the Latin rite has ecumenical significance, since it is used and valued also by
communities not yet in full communion with the Catholic Church. The issue of the Lectionary
presents itself differently in the liturgies of the Eastern Catholic Churches; the Synod requested
that this issue be “examined authoritatively”,[203] in accordance with the proper tradition and
competences of the sui iuris Churches, likewise taking into account the ecumenical
context.Proclamation of the word and the ministry of Reader58. The Synod on the Eucharist had
already called for greater care to be taken in the proclamation of the word of God.[204] As is
known, while the Gospel is proclaimed by a priest or deacon, in the Latin tradition the first and
second readings are proclaimed by an appointed reader, whether a man or a woman. I would like
to echo the Synod Fathers who once more stressed the need for the adequate training[205] of
those who exercise the munus of reader in liturgical celebrations,[206] and particularly those who
exercise the ministry of Reader, which in the Latin rite is, as such, a lay ministry. All those
entrusted with this office, even those not instituted in the ministry of Reader, should be truly
suitable and carefully trained. This training should be biblical and liturgical, as well as technical:
“The purpose of their biblical formation is to give readers the ability to understand the readings in
context and to perceive by the light of faith central point of the revealed message. The liturgical
formation ought to equip readers to have some grasp of the meaning and structure of the liturgy of
the word and the significance of its connection with the liturgy of the Eucharist. The technical
preparation should make the readers skilled in the art of reading publicly, either with the power of
their own voice or with the help of sound equipment.”[207]The importance of the homily59. Each
member of the People of God “has different duties and responsibilities with respect to the word of
35
God. Accordingly, the faithful listen to God’s word and meditate on it, but those who have the
office of teaching by virtue of sacred ordination or have been entrusted with exercising that
ministry”, namely, bishops, priests and deacons, “expound the word of God”.[208] Hence we can
understand the attention paid to the homily throughout the Synod. In the Apostolic Exhortation
Sacramentum Caritatis, I pointed out that “given the importance of the word of God, the quality of
homilies needs to be improved. The homily ‘is part of the liturgical action’ and is meant to foster a
deeper understanding of the word of God, so that it can bear fruit in the lives of the faithful”.[209]
The homily is a means of bringing the scriptural message to life in a way that helps the faithful to
realize that God’s word is present and at work in their everyday lives. It should lead to an
understanding of the mystery being celebrated, serve as a summons to mission, and prepare the
assembly for the profession of faith, the universal prayer and the Eucharistic liturgy. Consequently,
those who have been charged with preaching by virtue of a specific ministry ought to take this task
to heart. Generic and abstract homilies which obscure the directness of God’s word should be
avoided, as well as useless digressions which risk drawing greater attention to the preacher than
to the heart of the Gospel message. The faithful should be able to perceive clearly that the
preacher has a compelling desire to present Christ, who must stand at the centre of every homily.
For this reason preachers need to be in close and constant contact with the sacred text;[210] they
should prepare for the homily by meditation and prayer, so as to preach with conviction and
passion. The synodal assembly asked that the following questions be kept in mind: “What are the
Scriptures being proclaimed saying? What do they say to me personally? What should I say to the
community in the light of its concrete situation?[211] The preacher “should be the first to hear the
word of God which he proclaims”,[212] since, as Saint Augustine says: “He is undoubtedly barren
who preaches outwardly the word of God without hearing it inwardly”.[213] The homily for Sundays
and solemnities should be prepared carefully, without neglecting, whenever possible, to offer at
weekday Masses cum populo brief and timely reflections which can help the faithful to welcome
the word which was proclaimed and to let it bear fruit in their lives.The fittingness of a Directory on
Homiletics60. The art of good preaching based on the Lectionary is an art that needs to be
cultivated. Therefore, in continuity with the desire expressed by the previous Synod,[214] I ask the
competent authorities, along the lines of the Eucharistic Compendium,[215] also to prepare
practical publications to assist ministers in carrying out their task as best they can: as for example
a Directory on the homily, in which preachers can find useful assistance in preparing to exercise
their ministry. As Saint Jerome reminds us, preaching needs to be accompanied by the witness of
a good life: “Your actions should not contradict your words, lest when you preach in Church,
someone may begin to think: ‘So why don’t you yourself act that way?’ … In the priest of Christ,
thought and word must be in agreement”.[216]The word of God, Reconciliation and the Anointing
of the Sick61. Though the Eucharist certainly remains central to the relationship between God’s
word and the sacraments, we must also stress the importance of sacred Scripture in the other
sacraments, especially the sacraments of healing, namely the sacrament of Reconciliation or
Penance, and the sacrament of the Anointing of the Sick. The role of sacred Scripture in these
sacraments is often overlooked, yet it needs to be assured its proper place. We ought never to
forget that “the word of God is a word of reconciliation, for in it God has reconciled all things to
36
himself (cf. 2 Cor 5:18-20; Eph 1:10). The loving forgiveness of God, made flesh in Jesus, raises
up the sinner”.[217] “Through the word of God the Christian receives light to recognize his sins
and is called to conversion and to confidence in God’s mercy”.[218] To have a deeper experience
of the reconciling power of God’s word, the individual penitent should be encouraged to prepare
for confession by meditating on a suitable text of sacred Scripture and to begin confession by
reading or listening to a biblical exhortation such as those provided in the rite. When expressing
contrition it would be good if the penitent were to use “a prayer based on the words of
Scripture”,[219] such as those indicated in the rite. When possible, it would be good that at
particular times of the year, or whenever the opportunity presents itself, individual confession by a
number of penitents should take place within penitential celebrations as provided for by the ritual,
with due respect for the different liturgical traditions; here greater time can be devoted to the
celebration of the word through the use of suitable readings.In the case of the sacrament of the
Anointing of the Sick too, it must not be forgotten that “the healing power of the word of God is a
constant call to the listener’s personal conversion”.[220] Sacred Scripture contains countless
pages which speak of the consolation, support and healing which God brings. We can think
particularly of Jesus’ own closeness to those who suffer, and how he, God’s incarnate Word,
shouldered our pain and suffered out of love for us, thus giving meaning to sickness and death. It
is good that in parishes and in hospitals, according to circumstances, community celebrations of
the sacrament of the Anointing of the Sick should be held. On these occasions greater space
should be given to the celebration of the word, and the sick helped to endure their sufferings in
faith, in union with the redemptive sacrifice of Christ who delivers us from evil.The word of God
and the Liturgy of the Hours62. Among the forms of prayer which emphasize sacred Scripture, the
Liturgy of the Hours has an undoubted place. The Synod Fathers called it “a privileged form of
hearing the word of God, inasmuch as it brings the faithful into contact with Scripture and the living
Tradition of the Church”.[221] Above all, we should reflect on the profound theological and
ecclesial dignity of this prayer. “In the Liturgy of the Hours, the Church, exercising the priestly
office of her Head, offers ‘incessantly’ (1 Th 5:17) to God the sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of
lips that confess his name (cf. Heb 13:15). This prayer is ‘the voice of a bride speaking to her
bridegroom, it is the very prayer that Christ himself, together with his Body, addressed to the
Father’”.[222] The Second Vatican Council stated in this regard that “all who take part in this
prayer not only fulfil a duty of the Church, but also share in the high honour of the spouse of
Christ; for by celebrating the praises of God, they stand before his throne in the name of the
Church, their Mother”.[223] The Liturgy of the Hours, as the public prayer of the Church, sets forth
the Christian ideal of the sanctification of the entire day, marked by the rhythm of hearing the word
of God and praying the Psalms; in this way every activity can find its point of reference in the
praise offered to God.Those who by virtue of their state in life are obliged to pray the Liturgy of the
Hours should carry out this duty faithfully for the benefit of the whole Church. Bishops, priests and
deacons aspiring to the priesthood, all of whom have been charged by the Church to celebrate this
liturgy, are obliged to pray all the Hours daily.[224] As for the obligation of celebrating this liturgy in
the Eastern Catholic Churches sui iuris, the prescriptions of their proper law are to be
followed.[225] I also encourage communities of consecrated life to be exemplary in the celebration
37
of the Liturgy of the Hours, and thus to become a point of reference and an inspiration for the
spiritual and pastoral life of the whole Church.The Synod asked that this prayer become more
widespread among the People of God, particularly the recitation of Morning Prayer and Evening
Prayer. This could only lead to greater familiarity with the word of God on the part of the faithful.
Emphasis should also be placed on the value of the Liturgy of the Hours for the First Vespers of
Sundays and Solemnities, particularly in the Eastern Catholic Churches. To this end I recommend
that, wherever possible, parishes and religious communities promote this prayer with the
participation of the lay faithful.The word of God and the Book of Blessings63. Likewise, in using
the Book of Blessings attention should be paid to the space allotted to proclaiming, hearing and
briefly explaining the word of God. Indeed the act of blessing, in the cases provided for by the
Church and requested by the faithful, should not be something isolated but related in its proper
degree to the liturgical life of the People of God. In this sense a blessing, as a genuine sacred sign
which “derives its meaning and effectiveness from God’s word that is proclaimed”.[226] So it is
important also to use these situations as means of reawakening in the faithful a hunger and thirst
for every word that comes from the mouth of God (cf. Mt 4:4).Suggestions and practical proposals
for promoting fuller participation in the liturgy64. Having discussed some basic elements of the
relationship between the liturgy and the word of God, I would now like to take up and develop
several proposals and suggestions advanced by the Synod Fathers with a view to making the
People of God ever more familiar with the word of God in the context of liturgical actions or, in any
event, with reference to them.a) Celebrations of the word of God65. The Synod Fathers
encouraged all pastors to promote times devoted to the celebration of the word in the communities
entrusted to their care.[227] These celebrations are privileged occasions for an encounter with the
Lord. This practice will certainly benefit the faithful, and should be considered an important
element of liturgical formation. Celebrations of this sort are particularly significant as a preparation
for the Sunday Eucharist; they are also a way to help the faithful to delve deeply into the riches of
the Lectionary, and to pray and meditate on sacred Scripture, especially during the great liturgical
seasons of Advent and Christmas, Lent and Easter. Celebrations of the word of God are to be
highly recommended especially in those communities which, due to a shortage of clergy, are
unable to celebrate the Eucharistic sacrifice on Sundays and holydays of obligation. Keeping in
mind the indications already set forth in the Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation Sacramentum
Caritatis with regard to Sunday celebrations in the absence of a priest,[228] I recommend that
competent authorities prepare ritual directories, drawing on the experience of the particular
Churches. This will favour, in such circumstances, celebrations of the word capable of nourishing
the faith of believers, while avoiding the danger of the latter being confused with celebrations of
the Eucharist: “on the contrary, they should be privileged moments of prayer for God to send holy
priests after his own heart”.[229]The Synod Fathers also recommended celebrations of the word of
God on pilgrimages, special feasts, popular missions, spiritual retreats and special days of
penance, reparation or pardon. The various expressions of popular piety, albeit not liturgical acts
and not to be confused with liturgical celebrations, should nonetheless be inspired by the latter
and, above all, give due space to the proclamation and hearing of God’s word; “popular piety can
find in the word of God an inexhaustible source of inspiration, insuperable models of prayer and
38
fruitful points for reflection”.[230]b) The word and silence66. In their interventions, a good number
of Synod Fathers insisted on the importance of silence in relation to the word of God and its
reception in the lives of the faithful.[231] The word, in fact, can only be spoken and heard in
silence, outward and inward. Ours is not an age which fosters recollection; at times one has the
impression that people are afraid of detaching themselves, even for a moment, from the mass
media. For this reason, it is necessary nowadays that the People of God be educated in the value
of silence. Rediscovering the centrality of God’s word in the life of the Church also means
rediscovering a sense of recollection and inner repose. The great patristic tradition teaches us that
the mysteries of Christ all involve silence.[232] Only in silence can the word of God find a home in
us, as it did in Mary, woman of the word and, inseparably, woman of silence. Our liturgies must
facilitate this attitude of authentic listening: Verbo crescente, verba deficiunt.[233]The importance
of all this is particularly evident in the Liturgy of the Word, “which should be celebrated in a way
that favours meditation”.[234] Silence, when called for, should be considered “a part of the
celebration”.[235] Hence I encourage Pastors to foster moments of recollection whereby, with the
assistance of the Holy Spirit, the word of God can find a welcome in our hearts.c) The solemn
proclamation of the word of God67. Another suggestion which emerged from the Synod was that
the proclamation of the word of God, and the Gospel in particular, should be made more solemn,
especially on major liturgical feasts, through the use of the Gospel Book, carried in procession
during the opening rites and then brought to the lectern by a deacon or priest for proclamation.
This would help the people of God to realize that “the reading of the Gospel is the high point of the
liturgy of the word”.[236] Following the indications contained in the Ordo Lectionum Missae, it is
good that the word of God, especially the Gospel, be enhanced by being proclaimed in song,
particularly on certain solemnities. The greeting, the initial announcement: “A reading from the holy
Gospel” and the concluding words: “The Gospel of the Lord”, could well be sung as a way of
emphasizing the importance of what was read.[237]d) The word of God in Christian churches68. In
order to facilitate hearing the word of God, consideration should be given to measures which can
help focus the attention of the faithful. Concern should be shown for church acoustics, with due
respect for liturgical and architectural norms. “Bishops, duly assisted, in the construction of
churches should take care that they be adapted to the proclamation of the word, to meditation and
to the celebration of the Eucharist. Sacred spaces, even apart from the liturgical action, should be
eloquent and should present the Christian mystery in relation to the word of God”.[238]Special
attention should be given to the ambo as the liturgical space from which the word of God is
proclaimed. It should be located in a clearly visible place to which the attention of the faithful will
be naturally drawn during the liturgy of the word. It should be fixed, and decorated in aesthetic
harmony with the altar, in order to present visibly the theological significance of the double table of
the word and of the Eucharist. The readings, the responsorial psalm and the Exsultet are to be
proclaimed from the ambo; it can also be used for the homily and the prayers of the
faithful.[239]The Synod Fathers also proposed that churches give a place of honour to the sacred
Scriptures, even outside of liturgical celebrations.[240] It is good that the book which contains the
word of God should enjoy a visible place of honour inside the Christian temple, without prejudice
to the central place proper to the tabernacle containing the Blessed Sacrament.[241]e) The
39
exclusive use of biblical texts in the liturgy69. The Synod also clearly reaffirmed a point already
laid down by liturgical law,[242] namely that the readings drawn from sacred Scripture may never
be replaced by other texts, however significant the latter may be from a spiritual or pastoral
standpoint: “No text of spirituality or literature can equal the value and riches contained in sacred
Scripture, which is the word of God”.[243] This is an ancient rule of the Church which is to be
maintained.[244] In the face of certain abuses, Pope John Paul II had already reiterated the
importance of never using other readings in place of sacred Scripture.[245] It should also be kept
in mind that the Responsorial Psalm is also the word of God, and hence should not be replaced by
other texts; indeed it is most appropriate that it be sung.f) Biblically-inspired liturgical song70. As
part of the enhancement of the word of God in the liturgy, attention should also be paid to the use
of song at the times called for by the particular rite. Preference should be given to songs which are
of clear biblical inspiration and which express, through the harmony of music and words, the
beauty of God’s word. We would do well to make the most of those songs handed down to us by
the Church’s tradition which respect this criterion. I think in particular of the importance of
Gregorian chant.[246]g) Particular concern for the visually and hearing impaired71. Here I wish
also to recall the Synod’s recommendation that special attention be given to those who encounter
problems in participating actively in the liturgy; I think, for example, of the visually and hearing
impaired. I encourage our Christian communities to offer every possible practical assistance to our
brothers and sisters suffering from such impairments, so that they too can be able to experience a
living contact with the word of the Lord.[247]The Word Of God In The Life Of The
ChurchEncountering the word of God in sacred Scripture72. If it is true that the liturgy is the
privileged place for the proclamation, hearing and celebration of the word of God, it is likewise the
case that this encounter must be prepared in the hearts of the faithful and then deepened and
assimilated, above all by them. The Christian life is essentially marked by an encounter with Jesus
Christ, who calls us to follow him. For this reason, the Synod of Bishops frequently spoke of the
importance of pastoral care in the Christian communities as the proper setting where a personal
and communal journey based on the word of God can occur and truly serve as the basis for our
spiritual life. With the Synod Fathers I express my heartfelt hope for the flowering of “a new
season of greater love for sacred Scripture on the part of every member of the People of God, so
that their prayerful and faith-filled reading of the Bible will, with time, deepen their personal
relationship with Jesus”.[248]Throughout the history of the Church, numerous saints have spoken
of the need for knowledge of Scripture in order to grow in love for Christ. This is evident
particularly in the Fathers of the Church. Saint Jerome, in his great love for the word of God, often
wondered: “How could one live without the knowledge of Scripture, by which we come to know
Christ himself, who is the life of believers?”.[249] He knew well that the Bible is the means “by
which God speaks daily to believers”.[250] His advice to the Roman matron Leta about raising her
daughter was this: “Be sure that she studies a passage of Scripture each day… Prayer should
follow reading, and reading follow prayer… so that in the place of jewellery and silk, she may love
the divine books”.[251] Jerome’s counsel to the priest Nepotian can also be applied to us: “Read
the divine Scriptures frequently; indeed, the sacred book should never be out of your hands. Learn
there what you must teach”.[252] Let us follow the example of this great saint who devoted his life
40
to the study of the Bible and who gave the Church its Latin translation, the Vulgate, as well as the
example of all those saints who made an encounter with Christ the centre of their spiritual lives.
Let us renew our efforts to understand deeply the word which God has given to his Church: thus
we can aim for that “high standard of ordinary Christian living”[253] proposed by Pope John Paul II
at the beginning of the third Christian millennium, which finds constant nourishment in attentively
hearing the word of God.Letting the Bible inspire pastoral activity73. Along these lines the Synod
called for a particular pastoral commitment to emphasizing the centrality of the word of God in the
Church’s life, and recommended a greater “biblical apostolate”, not alongside other forms of
pastoral work, but as a means of letting the Bible inspire all pastoral work”.[254] This does not
mean adding a meeting here or there in parishes or dioceses, but rather of examining the ordinary
activities of Christian communities, in parishes, associations and movements, to see if they are
truly concerned with fostering a personal encounter with Christ, who gives himself to us in his
word. Since “ignorance of the Scriptures is ignorance of Christ”,[255] making the Bible the
inspiration of every ordinary and extraordinary pastoral outreach will lead to a greater awareness
of the person of Christ, who reveals the Father and is the fullness of divine revelation.For this
reason I encourage pastors and the faithful to recognize the importance of this emphasis on the
Bible: it will also be the best way to deal with certain pastoral problems which were discussed at
the Synod and have to do, for example, with the proliferation of sects which spread a distorted and
manipulative reading of sacred Scripture. Where the faithful are not helped to know the Bible in
accordance with the Church’s faith and based on her living Tradition, this pastoral vacuum
becomes fertile ground for realities like the sects to take root. Provision must also be made for the
suitable preparation of priests and lay persons who can instruct the People of God in the genuine
approach to Scripture.Furthermore, as was brought out during the Synod sessions, it is good that
pastoral activity also favour the growth of small communities, “formed by families or based in
parishes or linked to the different ecclesial movements and new communities”,[256] which can
help to promote formation, prayer and knowledge of the Bible in accordance with the Church’s
faith.The biblical dimension of catechesis74. An important aspect of the Church’s pastoral work
which, if used wisely, can help in rediscovering the centrality of God’s word is catechesis, which in
its various forms and levels must constantly accompany the journey of the People of God. Luke’s
description (cf. Lk 24:13-35) of the disciples who meet Jesus on the road to Emmaus represents,
in some sense, the model of a catechesis centred on “the explanation of the Scriptures”, an
explanation which Christ alone can give (cf. Lk 24:27-28), as he shows that they are fulfilled in his
person.[257] The hope which triumphs over every failure was thus reborn, and made those
disciples convinced and credible witnesses of the Risen Lord.The General Catechetical Directory
contains valuable guidelines for a biblically inspired catechesis and I readily encourage that these
be consulted.[258] Here I wish first and foremost to stress that catechesis “must be permeated by
the mindset, the spirit and the outlook of the Bible and the Gospels through assiduous contact with
the texts themselves; yet it also means remembering that catechesis will be all the richer and more
effective for reading the texts with the mind and the heart of the Church”,[259] and for drawing
inspiration from the two millennia of the Church’s reflection and life. A knowledge of biblical
personages, events and well-known sayings should thus be encouraged; this can also be
41
promoted by the judicious memorization of some passages which are particularly expressive of the
Christian mysteries. Catechetical work always entails approaching Scripture in faith and in the
Church’s Tradition, so that its words can be perceived as living, just as Christ is alive today
wherever two or three are gathered in his name (cf. Mt 18:20). Catechesis should communicate in
a lively way the history of salvation and the content of the Church’s faith, and so enable every
member of the faithful to realize that this history is also a part of his or her own life.Here it is
important to stress the relationship between sacred Scripture and the Catechism of the Catholic
Church, as it is set forth in the General Catechetical Directory: “Sacred Scripture, in fact, as ‘the
word of God written under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit’, and the Catechism of the Catholic
Church, as a significant contemporary expression of the living Tradition of the Church and a sure
norm for teaching the faith, are called, each in its own way and according to its specific authority,
to nourish catechesis in the Church today”.[260]The biblical formation of Christians75. In order to
achieve the goal set by the Synod, namely, an increased emphasis on the Bible in the Church’s
pastoral activity, all Christians, and catechists in particular, need to receive suitable training.
Attention needs to be paid to the biblical apostolate, which is a very valuable means to that end,
as the Church’s experience has shown. The Synod Fathers also recommended that, possibly
through the use of existing academic structures, centres of formation should be established where
laity and missionaries can be trained to understand, live and proclaim the word of God. Also,
where needed, specialized institutes for biblical studies should be established to ensure that
exegetes possess a solid understanding of theology and an appropriate appreciation for the
contexts in which they carry out their mission.[261]Sacred Scripture in large ecclesial
gatherings76. Among a variety of possible initiatives, the Synod suggested that in meetings,
whether at the diocesan, national or international levels, greater emphasis be given to the
importance of the word of God, its attentive hearing, and the faith-filled and prayerful reading of
the Bible. In Eucharistic Congresses, whether national or international, at World Youth Days and
other gatherings, it would be praiseworthy to make greater room for the celebration of the word
and for biblically-inspired moments of formation.[262]The word of God and vocations77. In
stressing faith’s intrinsic summons to an ever deeper relationship with Christ, the word of God in
our midst, the Synod also emphasized that this word calls each one of us personally, revealing
that life itself is a vocation from God. In other words, the more we grow in our personal relationship
with the Lord Jesus, the more we realize that he is calling us to holiness in and through the
definitive choices by which we respond to his love in our lives, taking up tasks and ministries which
help to build up the Church. This is why the Synod frequently encouraged all Christians to grow in
their relationship with the word of God, not only because of their Baptism, but also in accordance
with their call to various states in life. Here we touch upon one of the pivotal points in the teaching
of the Second Vatican Council, which insisted that each member of the faithful is called to holiness
according to his or her proper state in life.[263] Our call to holiness is revealed in sacred Scripture:
“Be holy, for I am holy” (Lev 11:44; 19:2; 20:7). Saint Paul then points out its Christological basis:
in Christ, the Father “has chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
blameless before him” (Eph 1:4). Paul’s greeting to his brothers and sisters in the community of
Rome can be taken as addressed to each of us: “To all God’s beloved, who are called to be
42
saints: grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!” (Rom 1:7).a)
Ordained ministers and the word of God78. I would like to speak first to the Church’s ordained
ministers, in order to remind them of the Synod’s statement that “the word of God is indispensable
in forming the heart of a good shepherd and minister of the word”.[264] Bishops, priests, and
deacons can hardly think that they are living out their vocation and mission apart from a decisive
and renewed commitment to sanctification, one of whose pillars is contact with God’s word.79. To
those called to the episcopate, who are the first and most authoritative heralds of the word, I would
repeat the words of Pope John Paul II in his Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation Pastores Gregis.
For the nourishment and progress of his spiritual life, the Bishop must always put “in first place,
reading and meditation on the word of God. Every Bishop must commend himself and feel himself
commended ‘to the Lord and to the word of his grace, which is able to build up and to give the
inheritance among all those who are sanctified’ (Acts 20:32). Before becoming one who hands on
the word, the Bishop, together with his priests and indeed like every member of the faithful, and
like the Church herself, must be a hearer of the word. He should dwell ‘within’ the word and allow
himself to be protected and nourished by it, as if by a mother’s womb”.[265] To all my brother
Bishops I recommend frequent personal reading and study of sacred Scripture, in imitation of
Mary, Virgo Audiens and Queen of the Apostles.80. To priests too, I would recall the words of
Pope John Paul II, who in the Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation Pastores Dabo Vobis, stated
that “the priest is first of all a minister of the word of God, consecrated and sent to announce the
Good News of the Kingdom to all, calling every person to the obedience of faith and leading
believers to an ever increasing knowledge of and communion in the mystery of God, as revealed
and communicated to us in Christ. For this reason the priest himself ought first of all to develop a
great personal familiarity with the word of God. Knowledge of its linguistic and exegetical aspects,
though certainly necessary, is not enough. He needs to approach the word with a docile and
prayerful heart so that it may deeply penetrate his thoughts and feelings and bring about a new
outlook in him – ‘the mind of Christ’ (1 Cor 2:16)”.[266] Consequently, his words, his choices and
his behaviour must increasingly become a reflection, proclamation and witness of the Gospel;
“only if he ‘abides’ in the word will the priest become a perfect disciple of the Lord. Only then then
will he know the truth and be set truly free”.[267]In a word, the priestly vocation demands that one
be consecrated “in the truth”. Jesus states this clearly with regard to his disciples: “Sanctify them
in the truth; your word is truth. As you have sent me into the world, so I have sent them into the
world” (Jn 17:17-18). The disciples in a certain sense become “drawn into intimacy with God by
being immersed in the word of God. God’s word is, so to speak, the purifying bath, the creative
power which changes them and makes them belong to God”.[268] And since Christ himself is
God’s Word made flesh (Jn 1:14) – “the Truth” (Jn 14:6) – Jesus’ prayer to the Father, “Sanctify
them in the truth”, means in the deepest sense: “Make them one with me, the Christ. Bind them to
me. Draw them into me. For there is only one priest of the New Covenant, Jesus Christ
himself”.[269] Priests need to grow constantly in their awareness of this reality.81. I would also like
to speak of the place of God’s word in the life of those called to the diaconate, not only as the final
step towards the order of priesthood, but as a permanent service. The Directory for the Permanent
Diaconate states that “the deacon’s theological identity clearly provides the features of his specific
43
spirituality, which is presented essentially as a spirituality of service. The model par excellence is
Christ as servant, lived totally at the service of God, for the good of humanity”.[270] From this
perspective, one can see how, in the various dimensions of the diaconal ministry, a “characteristic
element of diaconal spirituality is the word of God, of which the deacon is called to be an
authoritative preacher, believing what he preaches, teaching what he believes, and living what he
teaches”.[271] Hence, I recommend that deacons nourish their lives by the faith-filled reading of
sacred Scripture, accompanied by study and prayer. They should be introduced to “sacred
Scripture and its correct interpretation; to the relationship between Scripture and Tradition; in
particular to the use of Scripture in preaching, in catechesis and in pastoral activity in
general”.[272]b) The word of God and candidates for Holy Orders82. The Synod attributed
particular importance to the decisive role that the word of God must play in the spiritual life of
candidates for the ministerial priesthood: “Candidates for the priesthood must learn to love the
word of God. Scripture should thus be the soul of their theological formation, and emphasis must
be given to the indispensable interplay of exegesis, theology, spirituality and mission”.[273] Those
aspiring to the ministerial priesthood are called to a profound personal relationship with God’s
word, particularly in lectio divina, so that this relationship will in turn nurture their vocation: it is in
the light and strength of God’s word that one’s specific vocation can be discerned and
appreciated, loved and followed, and one’s proper mission carried out, by nourishing the heart with
thoughts of God, so that faith, as our response to the word, may become a new criterion for
judging and evaluating persons and things, events and issues.[274]Such attention to the prayerful
reading of Scripture must not in any way lead to a dichotomy with regard to the exegetical studies
which are a part of formation. The Synod recommended that seminarians be concretely helped to
see the relationship between biblical studies and scriptural prayer. The study of Scripture ought to
lead to an increased awareness of the mystery of divine revelation and foster an attitude of
prayerful response to the Lord who speaks. Conversely, an authentic life of prayer cannot fail to
nurture in the candidate’s heart a desire for greater knowledge of the God who has revealed
himself in his word as infinite love. Hence, great care should be taken to ensure that seminarians
always cultivate this reciprocity between study and prayer in their lives. This end will be served if
candidates are introduced to the study of Scripture through methods which favour this integral
approach.c) The word of God and the consecrated life83. With regard to the consecrated life, the
Synod first recalled that it “is born from hearing the word of God and embracing the Gospel as its
rule of life”.[275] A life devoted to following Christ in his chastity, poverty and obedience thus
becomes “a living ‘exegesis’ of God’s word”.[276] The Holy Spirit, in whom the Bible was written, is
the same Spirit who illumines “the word of God with new light for the founders and foundresses.
Every charism and every rule springs from it and seeks to be an expression of it”,[277] thus
opening up new pathways of Christian living marked by the radicalism of the Gospel.Here I would
mention that the great monastic tradition has always considered meditation on sacred Scripture to
be an essential part of its specific spirituality, particularly in the form of lectio divina. Today too,
both old and new expressions of special consecration are called to be genuine schools of the
spiritual life, where the Scriptures can be read according to the Holy Spirit in the Church, for the
benefit of the entire People of God. The Synod therefore recommended that communities of
44
consecrated life always make provision for solid instruction in the faith-filled reading of the
Bible.[278]Once again I would like to echo the consideration and gratitude that the Synod
expressed with regard to those forms of contemplative life whose specific charism is to devote a
great part of their day to imitating the Mother of God, who diligently pondered the words and deeds
of her Son (cf. Lk 2:19, 51), and Mary of Bethany, who sat at the Lord’s feet and listened
attentively to his words (cf. Lk 10:38). I think in particular of monks and cloistered nuns, who by
virtue of their separation from the world are all the more closely united to Christ, the heart of the
world. More than ever, the Church needs the witness of men and women resolved to “put nothing
before the love of Christ”.[279] The world today is often excessively caught up in outward activities
and risks losing its bearings. Contemplative men and women, by their lives of prayer, attentive
hearing and meditation on God’s Word, remind us that man does not live by bread alone but by
every word that comes from the mouth of God (cf. Mt 4:4). All the faithful, then, should be clearly
conscious that this form of life “shows today’s world what is most important, indeed, the one thing
necessary: there is an ultimate reason which makes life worth living, and that is God and his
inscrutable love”.[280]d) The word of God and the lay faithful84. The Synod frequently spoke of
the laity and thanked them for their generous activity in spreading the Gospel in the various
settings of daily life, at work and in the schools, in the family and in education.[281] This
responsibility, rooted in Baptism, needs to develop through an ever more conscious Christian way
of life capable of “accounting for the hope” within us (cf. 1 Pet 3:15). In the Gospel of Matthew,
Jesus points out that “the field is the world, and the good seed are the children of the Kingdom”
(13:38). These words apply especially to the Christian laity, who live out their specific vocation to
holiness by a life in the Spirit expressed “in a particular way by their engagement in temporal
matters and by their participation in earthly activities”.[282] The laity need to be trained to discern
God’s will through a familiarity with his word, read and studied in the Church under the guidance of
her legitimate pastors. They can receive this training at the school of the great ecclesial
spiritualities, all of which are grounded in sacred Scripture. Wherever possible, dioceses
themselves should provide an opportunity for continuing formation to lay persons charged with
particular ecclesial responsibilities.[283]e) The word of God, marriage and the family85. The
Synod also felt the need to stress the relationship between the word of God, marriage and the
Christian family. Indeed, “with the proclamation of the word of God, the Church reveals to Christian
families their true identity, what it is and what it must be in accordance with the Lord’s plan”.[284]
Consequently, it must never be forgotten that the word of God is at the very origin of marriage (cf.
Gen 2:24) and that Jesus himself made marriage one of the institutions of his Kingdom (cf. Mt
19:4-8), elevating to the dignity of a sacrament what was inscribed in human nature from the
beginning. “In the celebration of the sacrament, a man and a woman speak a prophetic word of
reciprocal self-giving, that of being ‘one flesh’, a sign of the mystery of the union of Christ with the
Church (cf. Eph 5:31-32)”.[285] Fidelity to God’s word leads us to point out that nowadays this
institution is in many ways under attack from the current mentality. In the face of widespread
confusion in the sphere of affectivity, and the rise of ways of thinking which trivialize the human
body and sexual differentiation, the word of God re-affirms the original goodness of the human
being, created as man and woman and called to a love which is faithful, reciprocal and fruitful.The
45
great mystery of marriage is the source of the essential responsibility of parents towards their
children. Part of authentic parenthood is to pass on and bear witness to the meaning of life in
Christ: through their fidelity and the unity of family life, spouses are the first to proclaim God’s word
to their children. The ecclesial community must support and assist them in fostering family prayer,
attentive hearing of the word of God, and knowledge of the Bible. To this end the Synod urged that
every household have its Bible, to be kept in a worthy place and used for reading and prayer.
Whatever help is needed in this regard can be provided by priests, deacons and a well-prepared
laity. The Synod also recommended the formation of small communities of families, where
common prayer and meditation on passages of Scripture can be cultivated.[286] Spouses should
also remember that “the Word of God is a precious support amid the difficulties which arise in
marriage and in family life”.[287]Here I would like to highlight the recommendations of the Synod
concerning the role of women in relation to the word of God. Today, more than in the past, the
“feminine genius”,[288] to use the words of John Paul II, has contributed greatly to the
understanding of Scripture and to the whole life of the Church, and this is now also the case with
biblical studies. The Synod paid special attention to the indispensable role played by women in the
family, education, catechesis and the communication of values. “They have an ability to lead
people to hear God’s word, to enjoy a personal relationship with God, and to show the meaning of
forgiveness and of evangelical sharing”.[289] They are likewise messengers of love, models of
mercy and peacemakers; they communicate warmth and humanity in a world which all too often
judges people according to the ruthless criteria of exploitation and profit.The prayerful reading of
sacred Scripture and “lectio divina”86. The Synod frequently insisted on the need for a prayerful
approach to the sacred text as a fundamental element in the spiritual life of every believer, in the
various ministries and states in life, with particular reference to lectio divina.[290] The word of God
is at the basis of all authentic Christian spirituality. The Synod Fathers thus took up the words of
the Dogmatic Constitution Dei Verbum: “Let the faithful go gladly to the sacred text itself, whether
in the sacred liturgy, which is full of the divine words, or in devout reading, or in such suitable
exercises and various other helps which, with the approval and guidance of the pastors of the
Church, are happily spreading everywhere in our day. Let them remember, however, that prayer
should accompany the reading of sacred Scripture”.[291] The Council thus sought to reappropriate
the great patristic tradition which had always recommended approaching the Scripture in dialogue
with God. As Saint Augustine puts it: “Your prayer is the word you speak to God. When you read
the Bible, God speaks to you; when you pray, you speak to God”.[292] Origen, one of the great
masters of this way of reading the Bible, maintains that understanding Scripture demands, even
more than study, closeness to Christ and prayer. Origen was convinced, in fact, that the best way
to know God is through love, and that there can be no authentic scientia Christi apart from growth
in his love. In his Letter to Gregory, the great Alexandrian theologian gave this advice: “Devote
yourself to the lectio of the divine Scriptures; apply yourself to this with perseverance. Do your
reading with the intent of believing in and pleasing God. If during the lectio you encounter a closed
door, knock and it will be opened to you by that guardian of whom Jesus said, ‘The gatekeeper will
open it for him’. By applying yourself in this way to lectio divina, search diligently and with
unshakable trust in God for the meaning of the divine Scriptures, which is hidden in great fullness
46
within. You ought not, however, to be satisfied merely with knocking and seeking: to understand
the things of God, what is absolutely necessary is oratio. For this reason, the Saviour told us not
only: ‘Seek and you will find’, and ‘Knock and it shall be opened to you’, but also added, ‘Ask and
you shall receive’”.[293]In this regard, however, one must avoid the risk of an individualistic
approach, and remember that God’s word is given to us precisely to build communion, to unite us
in the Truth along our path to God. While it is a word addressed to each of us personally, it is also
a word which builds community, which builds the Church. Consequently, the sacred text must
always be approached in the communion of the Church. In effect, “a communal reading of
Scripture is extremely important, because the living subject in the sacred Scriptures is the People
of God, it is the Church… Scripture does not belong to the past, because its subject, the People of
God inspired by God himself, is always the same, and therefore the word is always alive in the
living subject. As such, it is important to read and experience sacred Scripture in communion with
the Church, that is, with all the great witnesses to this word, beginning with the earliest Fathers up
to the saints of our own day, up to the present-day magisterium”.[294]For this reason, the
privileged place for the prayerful reading of sacred Scripture is the liturgy, and particularly the
Eucharist, in which, as we celebrate the Body and Blood of Christ in the sacrament, the word itself
is present and at work in our midst. In some sense the prayerful reading of the Bible, personal and
communal, must always be related to the Eucharistic celebration. Just as the adoration of the
Eucharist prepares for, accompanies and follows the liturgy of the Eucharist,[295] so too prayerful
reading, personal and communal, prepares for, accompanies and deepens what the Church
celebrates when she proclaims the word in a liturgical setting. By so closely relating lectio and
liturgy, we can better grasp the criteria which should guide this practice in the area of pastoral care
and in the spiritual life of the People of God.87. The documents produced before and during the
Synod mentioned a number of methods for a faith-filled and fruitful approach to sacred Scripture.
Yet the greatest attention was paid to lectio divina, which is truly “capable of opening up to the
faithful the treasures of God’s word, but also of bringing about an encounter with Christ, the living
word of God”.[296] I would like here to review the basic steps of this procedure. It opens with the
reading (lectio) of a text, which leads to a desire to understand its true content: what does the
biblical text say in itself? Without this, there is always a risk that the text will become a pretext for
never moving beyond our own ideas. Next comes meditation (meditatio), which asks: what does
the biblical text say to us? Here, each person, individually but also as a member of the community,
must let himself or herself be moved and challenged. Following this comes prayer (oratio), which
asks the question: what do we say to the Lord in response to his word? Prayer, as petition,
intercession, thanksgiving and praise, is the primary way by which the word transforms us. Finally,
lectio divina concludes with contemplation (contemplatio), during which we take up, as a gift from
God, his own way of seeing and judging reality, and ask ourselves what conversion of mind, heart
and life is the Lord asking of us? In the Letter to the Romans, Saint Paul tells us: “Do not be
conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that you may prove what
is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect” (12:2). Contemplation aims at creating
within us a truly wise and discerning vision of reality, as God sees it, and at forming within us “the
mind of Christ” (1 Cor 2:16). The word of God appears here as a criterion for discernment: it is
47
“living and active, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the division of soul and spirit, of
joints and marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart” (Heb 4:12). We do well
also to remember that the process of lectio divina is not concluded until it arrives at action (actio),
which moves the believer to make his or her life a gift for others in charity.We find the supreme
synthesis and fulfilment of this process in the Mother of God. For every member of the faithful
Mary is the model of docile acceptance of God’s word, for she “kept all these things, pondering
them in her heart” (Lk 2:19; cf. 2:51); she discovered the profound bond which unites, in God’s
great plan, apparently disparate events, actions and things.[297]I would also like to echo what the
Synod proposed about the importance of the personal reading of Scripture, also as a practice
allowing for the possibility, in accordance with the Church’s usual conditions, of gaining an
indulgence either for oneself or for the faithful departed.[298] The practice of indulgences[299]
implies the doctrine of the infinite merits of Christ – which the Church, as the minister of the
redemption, dispenses and applies, but it also implies that of the communion of saints, and it
teaches us that “to whatever degree we are united in Christ, we are united to one another, and the
supernatural life of each one can be useful for the others”.[300] From this standpoint, the reading
of the word of God sustains us on our journey of penance and conversion, enables us to deepen
our sense of belonging to the Church, and helps us to grow in familiarity with God. As Saint
Ambrose puts it, “When we take up the sacred Scriptures in faith and read them with the Church,
we walk once more with God in the Garden”.[301]The word of God and Marian prayer88. Mindful
of the inseparable bond between the word of God and Mary of Nazareth, along with the Synod
Fathers I urge that Marian prayer be encouraged among the faithful, above all in life of families,
since it is an aid to meditating on the holy mysteries found in the Scriptures. A most helpful aid, for
example, is the individual or communal recitation of the Holy Rosary,[302] which ponders the
mysteries of Christ’s life in union with Mary,[303] and which Pope John Paul II wished to enrich
with the mysteries of light.[304] It is fitting that the announcement of each mystery be
accompanied by a brief biblical text pertinent to that mystery, so as to encourage the memorization
of brief biblical passages relevant to the mysteries of Christ’s life.The Synod also recommended
that the faithful be encouraged to pray the Angelus. This prayer, simple yet profound, allows us “to
commemorate daily the mystery of the Incarnate Word”.[305] It is only right that the People of
God, families and communities of consecrated persons, be faithful to this Marian prayer
traditionally recited at sunrise, midday and sunset. In the Angelus we ask God to grant that,
through Mary’s intercession, we may imitate her in doing his will and in welcoming his word into
our lives. This practice can help us to grow in an authentic love for the mystery of the
incarnation.The ancient prayers of the Christian East which contemplate the entire history of
salvation in the light of the Theotokos, the Mother of God, are likewise worthy of being known,
appreciated and widely used. Here particular mention can be made of the Akathist and Paraklesis
prayers. These hymns of praise, chanted in the form of a litany and steeped in the faith of the
Church and in references to the Bible, help the faithful to meditate on the mysteries of Christ in
union with Mary. In particular, the venerable Akathist hymn to the Mother of God – so-called
because it is sung while standing – represents one of the highest expressions of the Marian piety
of the Byzantine tradition.[306] Praying with these words opens wide the heart and disposes it to
48
the peace that is from above, from God, to that peace which is Christ himself, born of Mary for our
salvation.The word of God and the Holy Land89. As we call to mind the Word of God who became
flesh in the womb of Mary of Nazareth, our heart now turns to the land where the mystery of our
salvation was accomplished, and from which the word of God spread to the ends of the earth. By
the power of the Holy Spirit, the Word became flesh in a specific time and place, in a strip of land
on the edges of the Roman Empire. The more we appreciate the universality and the uniqueness
of Christ’s person, the more we look with gratitude to that land where Jesus was born, where he
lived and where he gave his life for us. The stones on which our Redeemer walked are still
charged with his memory and continue to “cry out” the Good News. For this reason, the Synod
Fathers recalled the felicitous phrase which speaks of the Holy Land as “the Fifth Gospel”.[307]
How important it is that in those places there be Christian communities, notwithstanding any
number of hardships! The Synod of Bishops expressed profound closeness to all those Christians
who dwell in the land of Jesus and bear witness to their faith in the Risen One. Christians there
are called to serve not only as “a beacon of faith for the universal Church, but also as a leaven of
harmony, wisdom, and equilibrium in the life of a society which traditionally has been, and
continues to be, pluralistic, multi-ethnic and multi-religious”.[308]The Holy Land today remains a
goal of pilgrimage for the Christian people, a place of prayer and penance, as was testified to in
antiquity by authors like Saint Jerome.[309] The more we turn our eyes and our hearts to the
earthly Jerusalem, the more will our yearning be kindled for the heavenly Jerusalem, the true goal
of every pilgrimage, along with our eager desire that the name of Jesus, the one name which
brings salvation, may be acknowledged by all (cf. Acts 4:12).PART THREEVERBUM MUNDO“No
one has ever seen God. It is God the only Son,
who is close to the Father’s heart,
who has made him known”
(Jn 1:18)The Church’s Mission: To Proclaim The Word Of God To The WorldThe Word from the
Father and to the Father90. Saint John powerfully expresses the fundamental paradox of the
Christian faith. On the one hand, he says that “no one has ever seen God” (Jn 1:18; cf. 1 Jn 4:12).
In no way can our imaginations, our concepts or our words ever define or embrace the infinite
reality of the Most High. He remains Deus semper maior. Yet Saint John also tells us that the
Word truly “became flesh” (Jn 1:14). The only-begotten Son, who is ever with the Father, has
made known the God whom “no one has ever seen” (Jn 1:18). Jesus Christ comes to us, “full of
grace and truth” (Jn 1:14), to give us these gifts (cf. Jn 1:17); and “from his fullness we have all
received, grace upon grace” (Jn 1:16). In the Prologue of his Gospel, John thus contemplates the
Word from his being with God to his becoming flesh and his return to the Father with our humanity,
which he has assumed for ever. In this coming forth from God and returning to him (cf. Jn 13:3;
16:28; 17:8,10), Christ is presented as the one who “tells us” about God (cf. Jn 1:18). Indeed, as
Saint Irenaeus of Lyons says, the Son “is the revealer of the Father”.[310] Jesus of Nazareth is, so
to speak, the “exegete” of the God whom “no one has ever seen”. “He is the image of the invisible
God” (Col 1:15). Here we see fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah about the effectiveness of the Lord’s
word: as the rain and snow come down from heaven to water and to make the earth fruitful, so too
the word of God “shall not return to me empty, but it shall accomplish that which I purpose, and
49
prosper in the thing for which I sent it” (cf. Is 55:10f.). Jesus Christ is this definitive and effective
word which came forth from the Father and returned to him, perfectly accomplishing his will in the
world.Proclaiming to the world the “Logos” of hope91. The word of God has bestowed upon us the
divine life which transfigures the face of the earth, making all things new (cf. Rev 21:5). His word
engages us not only as hearers of divine revelation, but also as its heralds. The one whom the
Father has sent to do his will (cf. Jn 5:36-38; 6:38-40; 7:16-18) draws us to himself and makes us
part of his life and mission. The Spirit of the Risen Lord empowers us to proclaim the word
everywhere by the witness of our lives. This was experienced by the first Christian community,
which saw the word spread through preaching and witness (cf. Acts 6:7). Here we can think in
particular of the life of the Apostle Paul, a man completely caught up by the Lord (cf. Phil 3:12) – “it
is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me” (Gal 2:20) – and by his mission: “woe to me if I
do not proclaim the Gospel!” (1 Cor 9:16). Paul knew well that what was revealed in Christ is really
salvation for all peoples, liberation from the slavery of sin in order to enjoy the freedom of the
children of God.What the Church proclaims to the world is the Logos of Hope (cf. 1 Pet 3:15); in
order to be able to live fully each moment, men and women need “the great hope” which is “the
God who possesses a human face and who ‘has loved us to the end’ (Jn 13:1)”.[311] This is why
the Church is missionary by her very nature. We cannot keep to ourselves the words of eternal life
given to us in our encounter with Jesus Christ: they are meant for everyone, for every man and
woman. Everyone today, whether he or she knows it or not, needs this message. May the Lord
himself, as in the time of the prophet Amos, raise up in our midst a new hunger and thirst for the
word of God (cf. Am 8:11). It is our responsibility to pass on what, by God’s grace, we ourselves
have received.The word of God is the source of the Church’s mission92. The Synod of Bishops
forcefully reaffirmed the need within the Church for a revival of the missionary consciousness
present in the People of God from the beginning. The first Christians saw their missionary
preaching as a necessity rooted in the very nature of faith: the God in whom they believed was the
God of all, the one true God who revealed himself in Israel’s history and ultimately in his Son, who
thus provided the response which, in their inmost being, all men and women awaited. The first
Christian communities felt that their faith was not part of a particular cultural tradition, differing from
one people to another, but belonged instead to the realm of truth, which concerns everyone
equally.Once more it is Saint Paul who, by his life, illustrates the meaning of the Christian mission
and its fundamental universality. We can think here of the episode related in the Acts of the
Apostles about the Athenian Areopagus (cf. 17:16-34). The Apostle of the Nations enters into
dialogue with people of various cultures precisely because he is conscious that the mystery of
God, Known yet Unknown, which every man and woman perceives, however confusedly, has
really been revealed in history: “What therefore you worship as unknown, this I proclaim to you”
(Acts 17:23). In fact, the newness of Christian proclamation is that we can tell all peoples: “God
has shown himself. In person. And now the way to him is open. The novelty of the Christian
message does not consist in an idea but in a fact: God has revealed himself”.[312]The word and
the Kingdom of God93. Consequently, the Church’s mission cannot be considered as an optional
or supplementary element in her life. Rather it entails letting the Holy Spirit assimilate us to Christ
himself, and thus to share in his own mission: “As the Father has sent me, so I send you” (Jn
50
20:21) to share the word with your entire life. It is the word itself which impels us towards our
brothers and sisters: it is the word which illuminates, purifies, converts; we are only its
servants.We need, then, to discover ever anew the urgency and the beauty of the proclamation of
the word for the coming of the Kingdom of God which Christ himself preached. Thus we grow in
the realization, so clear to the Fathers of the Church, that the proclamation of the word has as its
content the Kingdom of God (cf. Mk 1:14-15), which, in the memorable phrase of Origen,[313] is
the very person of Jesus (Autobasileia). The Lord offers salvation to men and women in every
age. All of us recognize how much the light of Christ needs to illumine every area of human life:
the family, schools, culture, work, leisure and the other aspects of social life.[314] It is not a matter
of preaching a word of consolation, but rather a word which disrupts, which calls to conversion and
which opens the way to an encounter with the one through whom a new humanity flowers.All the
baptized are responsible for this proclamation94. Since the entire People of God is a people which
has been “sent”, the Synod reaffirmed that “the mission of proclaiming the word of God is the task
of all of the disciples of Jesus Christ based on their Baptism”.[315] No believer in Christ can feel
dispensed from this responsibility which comes from the fact of our sacramentally belonging to the
Body of Christ. A consciousness of this must be revived in every family, parish, community,
association and ecclesial movement. The Church, as a mystery of communion, is thus entirely
missionary, and everyone, according to his or her proper state in life, is called to give an incisive
contribution to the proclamation of Christ.Bishops and priests, in accordance with their specific
mission, are the first to be called to live a life completely at the service of the word, to proclaim the
Gospel, to celebrate the sacraments and to form the faithful in the authentic knowledge of
Scripture. Deacons too must feel themselves called to cooperate, in accordance with their specific
mission, in this task of evangelization.Throughout the Church’s history the consecrated life has
been outstanding for explicitly taking up the task of proclaiming and preaching the word of God in
the missio ad gentes and in the most difficult situations, for being ever ready to adapt to new
situations and for setting out courageously and boldly along fresh paths in meeting new challenges
for the effective proclamation of God’s word.[316]The laity are called to exercise their own
prophetic role, which derives directly from their Baptism, and to bear witness to the Gospel in daily
life, wherever they find themselves. In this regard the Synod Fathers expressed “the greatest
esteem, gratitude and encouragement for the service to evangelization which so many of the lay
faithful, and women in particular, provide with generosity and commitment in their communities
throughout the world, following the example of Mary Magdalene, the first witness of the joy of
Easter”.[317] The Synod also recognized with gratitude that the ecclesial movements and the new
communities are a great force for evangelization in our times and an incentive to the development
of new ways of proclaiming the Gospel.[318]The necessity of the “missio ad gentes”95. In calling
upon all the faithful to proclaim God’s word, the Synod Fathers restated the need in our day too for
a decisive commitment to the missio ad gentes. In no way can the Church restrict her pastoral
work to the “ordinary maintenance” of those who already know the Gospel of Christ. Missionary
outreach is a clear sign of the maturity of an ecclesial community. The Fathers also insisted that
the word of God is the saving truth which men and women in every age need to hear. For this
reason, it must be explicitly proclaimed. The Church must go out to meet each person in the
51
strength of the Spirit (cf. 1 Cor 2:5) and continue her prophetic defence of people’s right and
freedom to hear the word of God, while constantly seeking out the most effective ways of
proclaiming that word, even at the risk of persecution.[319] The Church feels duty-bound to
proclaim to every man and woman the word that saves (cf. Rom 1:14).Proclamation and the new
evangelization96. Pope John Paul II, taking up the prophetic words of Pope Paul VI in the
Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Nuntiandi, had in a variety of ways reminded the faithful of the
need for a new missionary season for the entire people of God.[320] At the dawn of the third
millennium not only are there still many peoples who have not come to know the Good News, but
also a great many Christians who need to have the word of God once more persuasively
proclaimed to them, so that they can concretely experience the power of the Gospel. Many of our
brothers and sisters are “baptized, but insufficiently evangelized”.[321] In a number of cases,
nations once rich in faith and in vocations are losing their identity under the influence of a
secularized culture.[322] The need for a new evangelization, so deeply felt by my venerable
Predecessor, must be valiantly reaffirmed, in the certainty that God’s word is effective. The
Church, sure of her Lord’s fidelity, never tires of proclaiming the good news of the Gospel and
invites all Christians to discover anew the attraction of following Christ.The word of God and
Christian witness97. The immense horizons of the Church’s mission and the complexity of today’s
situation call for new ways of effectively communicating the word of God. The Holy Spirit, the
protagonist of all evangelization, will never fail to guide Christ’s Church in this activity. Yet it is
important that every form of proclamation keep in mind, first of all, the intrinsic relationship
between the communication of God’s word and Christian witness. The very credibility of our
proclamation depends on this. On the one hand, the word must communicate every-thing that the
Lord himself has told us. On the other hand, it is indispensable, through witness, to make this word
credible, lest it appear merely as a beautiful philosophy or utopia, rather than a reality that can be
lived and itself give life. This reciprocity between word and witness reflects the way in which God
himself communicated through the incarnation of his Word. The word of God reaches men and
women “through an encounter with witnesses who make it present and alive”.[323] In a particular
way, young people need to be introduced to the word of God “through encounter and authentic
witness by adults, through the positive influence of friends and the great company of the ecclesial
community”.[324]There is a close relationship between the testimony of Scripture, as the selfattestation of God’s word, and the witness given by the lives of believers. One implies and leads to
the other. Christian witness communicates the word attested in the Scriptures. For their part, the
Scriptures explain the witness which Christians are called to give by their lives. Those who
encounter credible witnesses of the Gospel thus come to realize how effective God’s word can be
in those who receive it.98. In this interplay between witness and word we can understand what
Pope Paul VI stated in the Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Nuntiandi. Our responsibility is not
limited to suggesting shared values to the world; rather, we need to arrive at an explicit
proclamation of the word of God. Only in this way will we be faithful to Christ’s mandate: “The
Good News proclaimed by the witness of life sooner or later has to be proclaimed by the word of
life. There is no true evangelization unless the name, the teaching, the life, the promises, the
Kingdom and the mystery of Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of God, are proclaimed”.[325]The fact
52
that the proclamation of the word of God calls for the testimony of one’s life is a datum clearly
present in the Christian consciousness from the beginning. Christ himself is the faithful and true
witness (cf. Acts 1:5; 3:14), it is he who testifies to the Truth (cf. Jn 18:37). Here I would like to
echo the countless testimonials which we had the grace of hearing during the synodal assembly.
We were profoundly moved to hear the stories of those who lived their faith and bore outstanding
witness to the Gospel even under regimes hostile to Christianity or in situations of
persecution.None of this should cause us fear. Jesus himself said to his disciples: “A servant is not
greater than his master. If they persecuted me, they will persecute you” (Jn 15:20). For this reason
I would like, with the whole Church, to lift up to God a hymn of praise for the witness of our many
faithful brothers and sisters who, even in our day, have given their lives to communicate the truth
of God’s love revealed to us in the crucified and risen Christ. I also express the whole Church’s
gratitude for those Christians who have not yielded in the face of obstacles and even persecutions
for the sake of the Gospel. We likewise embrace with deep fraternal affection the faithful of all
those Christian communities, particularly in Asia and in Africa, who presently risk their life or social
segregation because of their faith. Here we encounter the true spirit of the Gospel, which
proclaims blessed those who are persecuted on account of the Lord Jesus (cf. Mt 5:11). In so
doing, we once more call upon the governments of nations to guarantee everyone freedom of
conscience and religion, as well as the ability to express their faith publicly.[326]The Word Of God
And Commitment In The WorldServing Jesus in “the least of his brethren” (Mt 25:40)99. The word
of God sheds light on human existence and stirs our conscience to take a deeper look at our lives,
inasmuch as all human history stands under God’s judgment: “When the Son of Man comes in his
glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne. Before him will be
gathered all the nations” (Mt 25:31-32). Nowadays we tend to halt in a superficial way before the
importance of the passing moment, as if it had nothing to do with the future. The Gospel, on the
other hand, reminds us that every moment of our life is important and must be lived intensely, in
the knowledge that everyone will have to give an account of his or her life. In the twenty-fifth
chapter of the Gospel of Matthew, the Son of Man considers whatever we do or do not do to “the
least of his brethren” (cf. 25:40, 45) as done or not done to himself: “I was hungry and you gave
me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed me, I was
naked and you clothed me, I was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to me”
(25:35-36). The word of God itself emphasizes the need for our engagement in the world and our
responsibility before Christ, the Lord of history. As we proclaim the Gospel, let us encourage one
another to do good and to commit ourselves to justice, reconciliation and peace.The word of God
and commitment to justice in society100. God’s word inspires men and women to build
relationships based on rectitude and justice, and testifies to the great value in God’s eyes of every
effort to create a more just and more liveable world.[327] The word of God itself unambiguously
denounces injustices and promotes solidarity and equality.[328] In the light of the Lord’s words, let
us discern the “signs of the times” present in history, and not flee from a commitment to those who
suffer and the victims of forms of selfishness.
The Synod recalled that a commitment to justice and to changing our world is an essential element
of evangelization. In the words of Pope Paul VI, we must “reach and as it were overturn with the
53
force of the Gospel the standards of judgement, the interests, the thought-patterns, the sources of
inspiration and life-styles of humanity that are in contrast with the word of God and with his plan for
salvation”.[329]For this reason, the Synod Fathers wished to say a special word to all those who
take part in political and social life. Evangelization and the spread of God’s word ought to inspire
their activity in the world, as they work for the true common good in respecting and promoting the
dignity of every person. Certainly it is not the direct task of the Church to create a more just
society, although she does have the right and duty to intervene on ethical and moral issues related
to the good of individuals and peoples. It is primarily the task of the lay faithful, formed in the
school of the Gospel, to be directly involved in political and social activity. For this reason, the
Synod recommends that they receive a suitable formation in the principles of the Church’s social
teaching.[330]101. I would like also to call the attention of everyone to the importance of defending
and promoting the human rights of every person, based on the natural law written on the human
heart, which, as such, are “universal, inviolable and inalienable”.[331] The Church expresses the
hope that by the recognition of these rights human dignity will be more effectively acknowledged
and universally promoted,[332] inasmuch as it is a distinctive mark imprinted by the Creator on his
creatures, taken up and redeemed by Jesus Christ through his incarnation, death and
resurrection. The spread of the word of God cannot fail to strengthen the recognition of, and
respect for, the human rights of every person.[333]The proclamation of God’s word, reconciliation
and peace between peoples102. Among the many areas where commitment is needed, the Synod
earnestly called for the promotion of reconciliation and peace. In the present context it is more
necessary than ever to rediscover the word of God as a source of reconciliation and peace, since
in that word God is reconciling to himself all things (cf. 2 Cor 5:18-20; Eph 1:10): Christ “is our
peace” (Eph 2:14), the one who breaks down the walls of division. A number of interventions at the
Synod documented the grave and violent conflicts and tensions present on our planet. At times
these hostilities seem to take on the appearance of interreligious conflict. Here I wish to affirm
once more that religion can never justify intolerance or war. We cannot kill in God’s name![334]
Each religion must encourage the right use of reason and promote ethical values that consolidate
civil coexistence.In fidelity to the work of reconciliation accomplished by God in Jesus Christ
crucified and risen, Catholics and men and women of goodwill must commit themselves to being
an example of reconciliation for the building of a just and peaceful society.[335] We should never
forget that “where human words become powerless because the tragic clash of violence and arms
prevails, the prophetic power of God’s word does not waver, reminding us that peace is possible
and that we ourselves must be instruments of reconciliation and peace”.[336]The word of God and
practical charity103. Commitment to justice, reconciliation and peace finds its ultimate foundation
and fulfilment in the love revealed to us in Christ. By listening to the testimonies offered during the
Synod, we saw more clearly the bond between a love-filled hearing of God’s word and selfless
service of our brothers and sisters; all believers should see the need to “translate the word that we
have heard into gestures of love, because this is the only way to make the Gospel proclamation
credible, despite the human weakness that marks individuals”.[337] Jesus passed through this
world doing good (cf. Acts 10:38). Listening with docility to the word of God in the Church awakens
“charity and justice towards all, especially towards the poor”.[338] We should never forget that
54
“love – caritas – will always prove necessary, even in the most just society … whoever wants to
eliminate love is preparing to eliminate man as such”.[339] I therefore encourage the faithful to
meditate often on the Apostle Paul’s hymn to charity and to draw inspiration from it: “Love is
patient and kind; love is not jealous or boastful; it is not arrogant or rude. Love does not insist on
its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at wrong but delights in the truth. Love
bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. Love never ends” (1 Cor
13:4-8).Love of neighbour, rooted in the love of God, ought to see us constantly committed as
individuals and as an ecclesial community, both local and universal. As Saint Augustine says: “It is
essential to realize that love is the fullness of the Law, as it is of all the divine Scriptures …
Whoever claims to have understood the Scriptures, or any part of them, without striving as a result
to grow in this twofold love of God and neighbour, makes it clear that he has not yet understood
them”.[340]The proclamation of the word of God and young people104. The Synod paid particular
attention to the proclamation of God’s word to the younger generation. Young people are already
active members of the Church and they represent its future. Often we encounter in them a
spontaneous openness to hearing the word of God and a sincere desire to know Jesus. Youth is a
time when genuine and irrepressible questions arise about the meaning of life and the direction
our own lives should take. Only God can give the true answer to these questions. Concern for
young people calls for courage and clarity in the message we proclaim; we need to help young
people to gain confidence and familiarity with sacred Scripture so it can become a compass
pointing out the path to follow.[341] Young people need witnesses and teachers who can walk with
them, teaching them to love the Gospel and to share it, especially with their peers, and thus to
become authentic and credible messengers.[342]God’s word needs to be presented in a way that
brings out its implications for each person’s vocation and assists young people in choosing the
direction they will give to their lives, including that of total consecration to God.[343] Authentic
vocations to the consecrated life and to the priesthood find fertile ground in a faith-filled contact
with the word of God. I repeat once again the appeal I made at the beginning of my pontificate to
open wide the doors to Christ: “If we let Christ into our lives, we lose nothing, nothing, absolutely
nothing of what makes life free, beautiful and great. No! Only in this friendship are the doors of life
opened wide. Only in this friendship is the great potential of human existence truly revealed. …
Dear young people: do not be afraid of Christ! He takes nothing away and he gives you
everything. When we give ourselves to him, we receive a hundredfold in return. Yes, open, open
wide the doors to Christ – and you will find true life”.[344]The proclamation of the word of God and
migrants105. The word of God makes us attentive to history and to emerging realities. In
considering the Church’s mission of evangelization, the Synod thus decided to address as well the
complex phenomenon of movements of migration, which in recent years have taken on
unprecedented proportions. This issue is fraught with extremely delicate questions about the
security of nations and the welcome to be given to those seeking refuge or improved conditions of
living, health and work. Large numbers of people who know nothing of Christ, or who have an
inadequate understanding of him, are settling in countries of Christian tradition. At the same time,
persons from nations deeply marked by Christian faith are emigrating to countries where Christ
needs to be proclaimed and a new evangelization is demanded. These situations offer new
55
possibilities for the spread of God’s word. In this regard the Synod Fathers stated that migrants
are entitled to hear the kerygma, which is to be proposed, not imposed. If they are Christians, they
require forms of pastoral care which can enable them to grow in the faith and to become in turn
messengers of the Gospel. Taking into account the complexity of the phenomenon, a mobilization
of all dioceses involved is essential, so that movements of migration will also be seen as an
opportunity to discover new forms of presence and proclamation. It is also necessary that they
ensure, to the extent possible, that these our brothers and sisters receive adequate welcome and
attention, so that, touched by the Good News, they will be able to be heralds of God’s word and
witnesses to the Risen Jesus, the hope of the world.[345]The proclamation of the word of God and
the suffering106. During the work of the Synod, the Fathers also considered the need to proclaim
God’s word to all those who are suffering, whether physically, psychologically or spiritually. It is in
times of pain that the ultimate questions about the meaning of one’s life make themselves acutely
felt. If human words seem to fall silent before the mystery of evil and suffering, and if our society
appears to value life only when it corresponds to certain standards of efficiency and well-being, the
word of God makes us see that even these moments are mysteriously “embraced” by God’s love.
Faith born of an encounter with God’s word helps us to realize that human life deserves to be lived
fully, even when weakened by illness and pain. God created us for happiness and for life, whereas
sickness and death came into the world as a result of sin (cf. Wis 2:23-24). Yet the Father of life is
mankind’s physician par excellence, and he does not cease to bend lovingly over suffering
humanity. We contemplate the culmination of God’s closeness to our sufferings in Jesus himself,
“the Word incarnate. He suffered and died for us. By his passion and death he took our weakness
upon himself and totally transformed it”.[346]Jesus’ closeness to those who suffer is constant: it is
prolonged in time thanks to the working of the Holy Spirit in the mission of the Church, in the word
and in the sacraments, in men and women of good will, and in charitable initiatives undertaken
with fraternal love by communities, thus making known God’s true face and his love. The Synod
thanked God for the luminous witness, often hidden, of all the many Christians – priests, religious
and lay faithful – who have lent and continue to lend their hands, eyes and hearts to Christ, the
true physician of body and soul. It exhorts all to continue to care for the infirm and to bring them
the life-giving presence of the Lord Jesus in the word and in the Eucharist. Those who suffer
should be helped to read the Scriptures and to realize that their condition itself enables them to
share in a special way in Christ’s redemptive suffering for the salvation of the world (cf. 2 Cor 4:8-
11,14).[347]The proclamation of the word of God and the poor107. Sacred Scripture manifests
God’s special love for the poor and the needy (cf. Mt 25:31-46). The Synod Fathers frequently
spoke of the importance of enabling these, our brothers and sisters, to hear the Gospel message
and to experience the closeness of their pastors and communities. Indeed, “the poor are the first
ones entitled to hear the proclamation of the Gospel; they need not only bread, but also words of
life”.[348] The diaconia of charity, which must never be lacking in our churches, should always be
bound to the proclamation of the word and the celebration of the sacred mysteries.[349] Yet we
also need to recognize and appreciate the fact that the poor are themselves agents of
evangelization. In the Bible, the true poor are those who entrust themselves totally to God; in the
Gospel Jesus calls them blessed, “for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven” (Mt 5:3; cf. Lk 6:20). The
56
Lord exalts the simplicity of heart of those who find in God true riches, placing their hope in him,
and not in the things of this world. The Church cannot let the poor down: “Pastors are called to
listen to them, to learn from them, to guide them in their faith and to encourage them to take
responsibility for lives”.[350]The Church also knows that poverty can exist as a virtue, to be
cultivated and chosen freely, as so many saints have done. Poverty can likewise exist as
indigence, often due to injustice or selfishness, marked by hunger and need, and as a source of
conflict. In her proclamation of God’s word, the Church knows that a “virtuous circle” must be
promoted between the poverty which is to be chosen and the poverty which is to be combated; we
need to rediscover “moderation and solidarity, these values of the Gospel that are also universal
… This entails decisions marked by justice and moderation”.[351]The proclamation of the word of
God and the protection of creation108. Engagement with the world, as demanded by God’s word,
makes us look with new eyes at the entire created cosmos, which contains traces of that word
through whom all things were made (cf. Jn 1:2). As men and women who believe in and proclaim
the Gospel, we have a responsibility towards creation. Revelation makes known God’s plan for the
cosmos, yet it also leads us to denounce that mistaken attitude which refuses to view all created
realities as a reflection of their Creator, but instead as mere raw material, to be exploited without
scruple. Man thus lacks that essential humility which would enable him to see creation as a gift
from God, to be received and used in accordance with his plan. Instead, the arrogance of human
beings who live “as if God did not exist” leads them to exploit and disfigure nature, failing to see it
as the handiwork of the creative word. In this theological context, I would like to echo the
statements of the Synod Fathers who reminded us that “accepting the word of God, attested to by
Scripture and by the Church’s living Tradition, gives rise to a new way of seeing things, promotes
an authentic ecology which has its deepest roots in the obedience of faith … [and] develops a
renewed theological sensitivity to the goodness of all things, which are created in Christ”.[352] We
need to be re-educated in wonder and in the ability to recognize the beauty made manifest in
created realities.[353]The Word Of God And CultureThe value of culture for the life of
humanity109. Saint John’s proclamation that the Word became flesh reveals the inseparable bond
between God’s word and the human words by which he communicates with us. In this context the
Synod Fathers considered the relationship between the word of God and culture. God does not
reveal himself in the abstract, but by using languages, imagery and expressions that are bound to
different cultures. This relationship has proved fruitful, as the history of the Church abundantly
testifies. Today it is entering a new phase due to the spread of the Gospel and its taking root
within different cultures, as well as more recent developments in the culture of the West. It calls in
the first place for a recognition of the importance of culture as such for the life of every man and
woman. The phenomenon of culture is, in its various aspects, an essential datum of human
experience. “Man lives always according to a culture which is properly his, and which in turn
creates among persons a bond which is properly theirs, one which determines the inter-human
and social character of human existence”.[354]Down the centuries the word of God has inspired
different cultures, giving rise to fundamental moral values, outstanding expressions of art and
exemplary life-styles.[355] Hence, in looking to a renewed encounter between the Bible and
culture, I wish to reassure all those who are part of the world of culture that they have nothing to
57
fear from openness to God’s word, which never destroys true culture, but rather is a constant
stimulus to seek ever more appropriate, meaningful and humane forms of expression. Every
authentic culture, if it is truly to be at the service of humanity, has to be open to transcendence
and, in the end, to God.The Bible, a great code for cultures110. The Synod Fathers greatly
stressed the importance of promoting a suitable knowledge of the Bible among those engaged in
the area of culture, also in secularized contexts and among non-believers.[356] Sacred Scripture
contains anthropological and philosophical values that have had a positive influence on humanity
as a whole.[357] A sense of the Bible as a great code for cultures needs to be fully
recovered.Knowledge of the Bible in schools and universities111. One particular setting for an
encounter between the word of God and culture is that of schools and universities. Pastors should
be especially attentive to this milieu, promoting a deeper knowledge of the Bible and a grasp of its
fruitful cultural implications also for the present day. Study centres supported by Catholic groups
offer a distinct contribution to the promotion of culture and education – and this ought to be
recognized. Nor must religious education be neglected, and religion teachers should be given
careful training. Religious education is often the sole opportunity available for students to
encounter the message of faith. In the teaching of religion, emphasis should be laid on knowledge
of sacred Scripture, as a means of overcoming prejudices old and new, and enabling its truth to be
better known.[358]Sacred Scripture in the variety of artistic expressions112. The relationship
between the word of God and culture has found expression in many areas, especially in the arts.
For this reason the great tradition of East and West has always esteemed works of art inspired by
sacred Scripture, as for example the figurative arts and architecture, literature and music. I think
too of the ancient language expressed by icons, which from the Eastern tradition is gradually
spreading throughout the world. With the Synod Fathers, the whole Church expresses her
appreciation, esteem and admiration of those artists “enamoured of beauty” who have drawn
inspiration from the sacred texts. They have contributed to the decoration of our churches, to the
celebration of our faith, to the enrichment of our liturgy and many of them have helped to make
somehow perceptible, in time and space, realities that are unseen and eternal.[359] I encourage
the competent offices and groups to promote in the Church a solid formation of artists with regard
to sacred Scripture in the light of the Church’s living Tradition and her magisterium.The word of
God and the means of social communication113. Linked to the relationship between the word of
God and culture is the need for a careful and intelligent use of the communications media, both old
and new. The Synod Fathers called for a proper knowledge of these media; they noted their rapid
development and different levels of interaction, and asked for greater efforts to be made in gaining
expertise in the various sectors involved, particularly in the new media, such as the internet. The
Church already has a significant presence in the world of mass communications, and her
magisterium has frequently intervened on the subject, beginning with the Second Vatican
Council.[360] Discovering new methods of transmitting the Gospel message is part of the
continuing evangelizing outreach of those who believe. Communications today take place through
a worldwide network, and thus give new meaning to Christ’s words: “What I tell you in the dark,
utter in the light; and what you hear whispered, proclaim upon the housetops” (Mt 10:27). God’s
word should resound not only in the print media, but in other forms of communication as well.[361]
58
For this reason, together with the Synod Fathers, I express gratitude to those Catholics who are
making serious efforts to promote a significant presence in the world of the media, and I ask for an
ever wider and more qualified commitment in this regard.[362]Among the new forms of mass
communication, nowadays we need to recognize the increased role of the internet, which
represents a new forum for making the Gospel heard. Yet we also need to be aware that the
virtual world will never be able to replace the real world, and that evangelization will be able to
make use of the virtual world offered by the new media in order to create meaningful relationships
only if it is able to offer the personal contact which remains indispensable. In the world of the
internet, which enables billions of images to appear on millions of screens throughout the world,
the face of Christ needs to be seen and his voice heard, for “if there is no room for Christ, there is
no room for man”.[363]The Bible and inculturation114. The mystery of the incarnation tells us that
while God always communicates in a concrete history, taking up the cultural codes embedded
therein, the same word can and must also be passed on in different cultures, transforming them
from within through what Pope Paul VI called the evangelization of cultures.[364] The word of
God, like the Christian faith itself, has a profoundly intercultural character; it is capable of
encountering different cultures and in turn enabling them to encounter one another.[365]Here too
we come to appreciate the importance of the inculturation of the Gospel.[366] The Church is firmly
convinced that the word of God is inherently capable of speaking to all human persons in the
context of their own culture: “this conviction springs from the Bible itself, which, right from the Book
of Genesis, adopts a universalist stance (cf. Gen 1:27-28), maintains it subsequently in the
blessing promised to all peoples through Abraham and his offspring (cf. Gen 12:3; 18:18), and
confirms it definitively in extending to ‘all nations’ the proclamation of the Gospel”.[367] For this
reason, inculturation is not to be confused with processes of superficial adaptation, much less with
a confused syncretism which would dilute the uniqueness of the Gospel in an attempt to make it
more easily accepted.[368] The authentic paradigm of inculturation is the incarnation itself of the
Word: “‘Acculturation’ or ‘inculturation’ will truly be a reflection of the incarnation of the Word when
a culture, transformed and regenerated by the Gospel, brings forth from its own living tradition
original expressions of Christian life, celebration and thought”,[369] serving as a leaven within the
local culture, enhancing the semina Verbi and all those positive elements present within that
culture, thus opening it to the values of the Gospel.[370]Translating the Bible and making it more
widely available115. The inculturation of God’s word is an integral part of the Church’s mission in
the world, and a decisive moment in this process is the diffusion of the Bible through the precious
work of translation into different languages. Here it should always be remembered that the work of
translation of the Scriptures had been undertaken “already in the Old Testament period, when the
Hebrew text of the Bible was translated orally into Aramaic (Neh 8:8,12) and later in written form
into Greek. A translation, of course, is always more than a simple transcription of the original texts.
The passage from one language to another necessarily involves a change of cultural context:
concepts are not identical and symbols have a different meaning, for they come up against other
traditions of thought and other ways of life”.[371]During the Synod, it was clear that a number of
local Churches still lack a complete translation of the Bible in their own languages. How many
people today hunger and thirst for the word of God, yet remain deprived of the “widely available
59
access to Sacred Scripture”[372] desired by the Second Vatican Council! For this reason the
Synod considered it important, above all, to train specialists committed to translating the Bible into
the various languages.[373] I would encourage the investment of resources in this area. In
particular I wish to recommend supporting the work of the Catholic Biblical Federation, with the
aim of further increasing the number of translations of sacred Scripture and their wide
diffusion.[374] Given the very nature of such an enterprise, it should be carried out as much as
possible in cooperation with the different Bible Societies.God’s word transcends cultural limits116.
The synodal assembly, in its discussion of the relationship between God’s word and cultures, felt
the need to reaffirm something that the earliest Christians had experienced beginning on the day
of Pentecost (Acts 2:1-2). The word of God is capable of entering into and finding expression in
various cultures and languages, yet that same word overcomes the limits of individual cultures to
create fellowship between different peoples. The Lord’s word summons us to advance towards an
ever more vast communion. “We escape the limitations of our experience and we enter into the
reality that is truly universal. Entering into communion with the word of God, we enter into the
communion of the Church which lives the word of God. … It means going beyond the limits of the
individual cultures into the universality that connects all, unites all, makes us all brothers and
sisters”.[375] The proclamation of God’s work thus always demands, of us in the first place, a new
exodus, as we leave behind our own limited standards and imaginations in order to make room for
the presence of Christ.The Word Of God
And Interreligious DialogueThe value of interreligious dialogue117. The Church considers an
essential part of the proclamation of the word to consist in encounter, dialogue and cooperation
with all people of good will, particularly with the followers of the different religious traditions of
humanity. This is to take place without forms of syncretism and relativism, but along the lines
indicated by the Second Vatican Council’s Declaration Nostra Aetate and subsequently developed
by the magisterium of the Popes.[376] Nowadays the quickened pace of globalization makes it
possible for people of different cultures and religions to be in closer contact. This represents a
providential opportunity for demonstrating how authentic religiosity can foster relationships of
universal fraternity. Today, in our frequently secularized societies, it is very important that the
religions be capable of fostering a mentality that sees Almighty God as the foundation of all good,
the inexhaustible source of the moral life, and the bulwark of a profound sense of universal
brotherhood.In the Judeo-Christian tradition, for example, one finds a moving witness to God’s
love for all peoples: in the covenant with Noah he joins them in one great embrace symbolized by
the “bow in the clouds” (Gen 9:13,14,16) and, according to the words of the prophets, he desires
to gather them into a single universal family (cf. Is 2:2ff; 42:6; 66:18-21; Jer 4:2; Ps 47). Evidence
of a close connection between a relationship with God and the ethics of love for everyone is found
in many great religious traditions.Dialogue between Christians and Muslims118. Among the
various religions the Church also looks with respect to Muslims, who adore the one God.[377]
They look to Abraham and worship God above all through prayer, almsgiving and fasting. We
acknowledge that the Islamic tradition includes countless biblical figures, symbols and themes.
Taking up the efforts begun by the Venerable John Paul II, I express my hope that the trust-filled
relationships established between Christians and Muslims over the years will continue to develop
60
in a spirit of sincere and respectful dialogue.[378] In this dialogue the Synod asked for a deeper
reflection on respect for life as a fundamental value, the inalienable rights of men and women, and
their equal dignity. Taking into account the important distinction to be made between the sociopolitical order and the religious order, the various religions must make their specific contribution to
the common good. The Synod asked Conferences of Bishops, wherever it is appropriate and
helpful, to encourage meetings aimed at helping Christians and Muslims to come to better
knowledge of one another, in order to promote the values which society needs for a peaceful and
positive coexistence.[379]Dialogue with other religions119. Here too I wish to voice the Church’s
respect for the ancient religions and spiritual traditions of the various continents. These contain
values which can greatly advance understanding between individuals and peoples.[380]
Frequently we note a consonance with values expressed also in their religious books, such as, in
Buddhism, respect for life, contemplation, silence, simplicity; in Hinduism, the sense of the sacred,
sacrifice and fasting; and again, in Confucianism, family and social values. We are also gratified to
find in other religious experiences a genuine concern for the transcendence of God, acknowledged
as Creator, as well as respect for life, marriage and the family, and a strong sense of
solidarity.Dialogue and religious freedom120. All the same, dialogue would not prove fruitful
unless it included authentic respect for each person and the ability of all freely to practise their
religion. Hence the Synod, while encouraging cooperation between the followers of the different
religions, also pointed out “the need for the freedom to profess one’s religion, privately and
publicly, and freedom of conscience to be effectively guaranteed to all believers”:[381] indeed,
“respect and dialogue require reciprocity in all spheres, especially in that which concerns basic
freedoms, more particularly religious freedom. Such respect and dialogue foster peace and
understanding between peoples”.[382]CONCLUSIONGod’s definitive word121. At the conclusion
of these reflections with which I have sought to gather up and examine more fully the rich fruits of
the Twelfth Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops on the word of God in the life and
mission of the Church, I wish once more to encourage all the People of God, pastors, consecrated
persons and the laity, to become increasingly familiar with the sacred Scriptures. We must never
forget that all authentic and living Christian spirituality is based on the word of God proclaimed,
accepted, celebrated and meditated upon in the Church. This deepening relationship with the
divine word will take place with even greater enthusiasm if we are conscious that, in Scripture and
the Church’s living Tradition, we stand before God’s definitive word on the cosmos and on
history.The Prologue of John’s Gospel leads us to ponder the fact that everything that exists is
under the sign of the Word. The Word goes forth from the Father, comes to dwell in our midst and
then returns to the Father in order to bring with him the whole of creation which was made in him
and for him. The Church now carries out her mission in eager expectation of the eschatological
manifestation of the Bridegroom: “the Spirit and the bride say: ‘Come!’” (Rev 22:17). This
expectation is never passive; rather it is a missionary drive to proclaim the word of God which
heals and redeems every man. Today too the Risen Jesus says to us: “Go into all the world and
proclaim the Gospel to the whole creation” (Mk 16:15).New evangelization and a new hearing122.
Our own time, then, must be increasingly marked by a new hearing of God’s word and a new
evangelization. Recovering the centrality of the divine word in the Christian life leads us to
61
appreciate anew the deepest meaning of the forceful appeal of Pope John Paul II: to pursue the
missio ad gentes and vigorously to embark upon the new evangelization, especially in those
nations where the Gospel has been forgotten or meets with indifference as a result of widespread
secularism. May the Holy Spirit awaken a hunger and thirst for the word of God, and raise up
zealous heralds and witnesses of the Gospel.Following the example of the great Apostle of the
Nations, who changed the course of his life after hearing the voice of the Lord (cf. Acts 9:1-30), let
us too hear God’s word as it speaks to us, ever personally, here and now. The Holy Spirit, we are
told in the Acts of the Apostles, set Paul and Barnabas apart to proclaim and spread the Good
News (cf. 13:2). In our day too, the Holy Spirit constantly calls convinced and persuasive hearers
and preachers of the word of the Lord.The word and joy123. The greater our openness to God’s
word, the more will we be able to recognize that today too the mystery of Pentecost is taking place
in God’s Church. The Spirit of the Lord continues to pour out his gifts upon the Church to guide us
into all truth, to show us the meaning of the Scriptures and to make us credible heralds of the word
of salvation before the world. Thus we return to the First Letter of Saint John. In God’s word, we
too have heard, we too have seen and touched the Word of life. We have welcomed by grace the
proclamation that eternal life has been revealed, and thus we have come to acknowledge our
fellowship with one another, with those who have gone before us marked with the sign of faith, and
with all those who throughout the world hear the word, celebrate the Eucharist and by their lives
bear witness to charity. This proclamation has been shared with us – the Apostle John reminds us
– so that “our joy may be complete” (1 Jn 1:4).The synodal assembly enabled us to experience all
that Saint John speaks of: the proclamation of the word creates communion and brings about joy.
This is a profound joy which has its origin in the very heart of the trinitarian life and which is
communicated to us in the Son. This joy is an ineffable gift which the world cannot give.
Celebrations can be organized, but not joy. According to the Scripture, joy is the fruit of the Holy
Spirit (cf. Gal 5:22) who enables us to enter into the word and enables the divine word to enter into
us and to bear fruit for eternal life. By proclaiming God’s word in the power of the Holy Spirit, we
also wish to share the source of true joy, not a superficial and fleeting joy, but the joy born of the
awareness that the Lord Jesus alone has words of everlasting life (cf. Jn 6:68).“Mater Verbi et
Mater laetitiae”124. This close relationship between God’s word and joy is evident in the Mother of
God. Let us recall the words of Saint Elizabeth: “Blessed is she who believed that there would be a
fulfilment of what was spoken to her by the Lord” (Lk 1:45). Mary is blessed because she has faith,
because she believed, and in this faith she received the Word of God into her womb in order to
give him to the world. The joy born of the Word can now expand to all those who, by faith, let
themselves be changed by God’s word. The Gospel of Luke presents this mystery of hearing and
joy in two texts. Jesus says: “My mother and my brothers are those who hear the word of God and
do it” (8:21). And in reply to a woman from the crowd who blesses the womb that bore him and the
breasts that nursed him, Jesus reveals the secret of true joy: “Blessed rather are those who hear
the word of God and obey it!” (11:28). Jesus points out Mary’s true grandeur, making it possible for
each of us to attain that blessedness which is born of the word received and put into practice. I
remind all Christians that our personal and communal relationship with God depends on our
growing familiarity with the word of God. Finally, I turn to every man and woman, including those
62
who have fallen away from the Church, who have left the faith or who have never heard the
proclamation of salvation. To everyone the Lord says: “Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if
anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in to him and eat with him, and he with
me” (Rev 3:20).May every day of our lives thus be shaped by a renewed encounter with Christ, the
Word of the Father made flesh: he stands at the beginning and the end, and “in him all things hold
together” (Col 1:17). Let us be silent in order to hear the Lord’s word and to meditate upon it, so
that by the working of the Holy Spirit it may remain in our hearts and speak to us all the days of
our lives. In this way the Church will always be renewed and rejuvenated, thanks to the word of
the Lord which remains for ever (cf. 1 Pet 1:25; Is 40:8). Thus we too will enter into the great
nuptial dialogue which concludes sacred Scripture: “The Spirit and the bride say: ‘Come’. And let
everyone who hears say: ‘Come!’” The one who testifies to these things, says: ‘Surely I am coming
soon!’. Amen. Come, Lord Jesus!”. (Rev 22:17, 20).
